
Intro
So in this section of the lectures, we're going to move from estimating
simple representations of treatment effect heterogeneity, like the case in causal
trees to estimating flexible functional forms for Kate's for the tao of x.
And when we think about why we'd want to have these flexible functional forms, why we would want to have a smooth nonparametric estimate tau of x,
there's a variety of motivations. One is that you might want to understand partial effects.
We might want to understand how treatment effects change if I hold some xs fixed, and I change others.
Another motivation is that we're going to use these as an input into estimation of lower dimensional objects like we're going to use
estimates of CATEs in order to pick the highest CATE individuals and assign them to a treatment, or might use them to estimate optimal policies.
So they can either be of interest in their own right or they can be an input into another type of estimation problem.
Baseline method: k-NN matching
So to get started, let's think about a baseline method for estimating flexibly tau of x, the conditional average treatment effect.
A method that's been around for a long time is known as matching or in the machine learning paper.
It's often called k-NN where NN stands for nearest neighbors, and k is the number of neighbors.
Using k-NN, the estimator for tau of x is constructed by first for the target x the realization little x that you're trying to go for.
You take the k closest treated observations, take the sample mean, then you take the k closest control observations, take the sample mean.
And then you take the difference between the two. And we'll use this to construct an estimate of tau hat of x.
So an advantage of this method is it's very straightforward to understand what's going on. And it's actually got good robust performance when the number of covariates
is small. But a challenge with it is it's got an acute curse of dimensionality even for
relatively small numbers of covariates, say if we have 20, covariates and 20,000 observations, the cause of dimensionality starts to kick in.
Another version of this is a kernel regression and you can think of a kernel regression as a generalisation of k-NN.
In this case for given x, we're finding, putting equal weight on all the nearest neighbours to x and zero weight elsewhere.
A kernel is going to take a weighted average of nearby treated observations,
but it's going to wait closer observations more highly and farther away observations less so.
But it's going to just do simile, a weighted average of observations that are treated in your x minus a weighted
average of observations that are near expert or control observations.
Adaptive nearest neighbor matching
Now let's talk about random forests and we're going to interpret random forest in a way that's a little different than standard.
We're going to interpret it as adaptive nearest neighbor matching. So random forests are a popular heuristic for adaptive nearest neighbor estimation.
They were introduced by Breiman in 2001. And they actually have an excellent empirical track record and
they're often used as a black box and they work well out of the box. If you don't tune them, they tend to still perform pretty well.
So they're one of the fastest high performing machine learning methods you can get coded up. But, we often use them without really understanding why they work or
how to evaluate their performance. In the early 2000s, there were several people that
started thinking about using various types of forest methods for treatment effects estimation, but without formal theory.
What Walker and I did, and it's the Fonz job market paper was provide the first formal results along
random forests to be used if with provably valid asymptotic inference.
So what we did was we figured out how we can modify forest algorithms in order to make them usable for inference.
And those were the first results for prediction before us of that sort. And then we extended those to estimate causal effects as well.
So to understand how a causal forest works, let's start with a causal tree. So we've already covered causal trees.
Making k-NN matching adaptive
They define neighborhoods for matching based on recursive partitioning, and they advocate for sample splitting to ensure that we get assumption-free
confidence intervals for treatment effects in each leaf. And so we can contrast tree based neighborhoods with k-NN.
On the right, we see this picture where for a target x, we're going to understand the treatment effect estimates for x, based
on the sample average treatment effect for observations in the same leaf as x.
So we'll use recursive partitioning, if it's causal inference using our causal inference splitting rule,
we'll come up with this partition of the x space. And then we'll estimate the treatment effect for
x on a separate estimation sample based on the observations in the same leaf. We contrast that to nearest neighbour matching, we would take a target x,
we would draw a circle around that, we would find all observations that are closest to x.
And then we would again get the sample average treatment effect for those observations that are nearby x.
Now how do you go from trees to forest? Well, again, imagine we have a training set with covariates X outcome Y
From trees to random forests (Breiman, 2001)
treatment assignment W and a test point. And suppose we have a tree predictor.
So we've estimated say a causal tree and for for the particular value of X, we have a predictor based on a tree.
The random forest idea is to build an average many different trees. So our estimate of tau hat of x can be an average
over many trees of estimates of treatment effects.
Now how do we turn a single tree predictor into having lots of different trees? Well, there's a variety of ways.
One is bagging or subsampling the training set. And this can be, this is helpful for smoothing over discontinuities.
So when we have a single tree, remember that if x is near the boundary, then the estimate for the treatment effect for
x can change discontinuously if we change x across the boundary.
Now the literature is about try both bagging and subsampling, we're going to focus on sub sampling because that's going to give us nicer
statistical properties. Another thing that's often done to make each trade different from one another
is to focus on a subset of covariates for each tree, and because we're using different covariates to build each tree, we'll get different trees.
Now the literature actually often focuses more on bagging and a lot of that's the default setting in a lot of random forest packages.
But subsampling is particularly nice, because if we take a subsample of the observations to construct a tree,
we can then get get estimates by taking a second subsample. And that's going to make each of our trees honest.
And if we average up a bunch of honest trees, we'll get unbiased estimates.
Statistical inference with regression forests
So, honest trees don't use the same data to select the partition and
make predictions. So what we're going to do is build forests out of those kinds of honest trees.
And so the main results in Wager and Athey, 2018, is that when we build forests by averaging up a bunch of honest
trees using subsampling under some technical conditions.
Then as the number of observations goes to infinity, the estimates
are going to be asymptotically normal and centered around the truth.
That allows us to, for example, construct confidence intervals.
Causal forest example
So to see an example of how this works in practice, let's imagine we have 20,000 observations. We have uniformly distributed features in six covariates.
And treatment assignment is random. And suppose that all of the signal is concentrated along two features.
So four of the x's are kind of noise covariates, and two of them actually affect treatment effects.
So we look over here first on the left, we see a heat map of the true effect.
So we've got this nonlinear relationship, and treatment effects are bigger in this right upper corner and lower elsewhere.
We see that when we use causal forests to estimate these treatment effects,
we pick up this nonlinear shape. Although you can see it's a little bit boxy relative to the truth.
And that's coming from the fact that the forest is an average of trees. We look over here at the k-NN estimate and
we see that the estimates are a bit smeared. And that's because in six dimensions, what we're looking for are neighbors that
are similar in all six dimensions, but only two dimensions matter. So in order to get close in the other four dimensions which the model doesn't know
don't matter, we have to be somewhat further away in two dimensions. While the causal forest is going to use this adaptive splitting rule, it's
going to figure out which covariates are important to split on when building trees. And so it's going to construct neighborhoods that are based on x1 and x2,
and not the noise covariates. So these figures illustrate the curse of dimensionality.
Now we try the same exercise with 20,000 observations. We see the causal forest now, it's actually extra sharp, and it's kind
of too sharp in terms of understanding the boundary of treatment effects, but the k-NN estimate is incredibly smeared.
Now we're trying to find k nearest neighbors where the neighbors are nearby in 20 dimensions, and it just doesn't work.
So again, we see the advantage of adaptivity. The trees which are targeting treatment effect heterogeneity zero
in on the right covariates and are able to do a much better job discriminating treatment effects heterogeneity than the k-NN approach.
So we can look here and see how well calibrated the models are. And we see that on the left when we look at both causal forests,
we see that things look very well calibrated. That is, on the x-axis, we have true treatment effects, and
on the y-axis, we have estimated treatment effects. And they're lining up on the 45 degree line, which means that estimates are close to truth.
Now, we do see a little bit of issue here around the boundaries, where there's clearly some bias going on here.
And that's coming from the fact that the trees are still having a hard time building neighborhoods near the boundaries that discriminate
well enough among the different values of the treatment effects.
We see a much bigger problem over here with the k-NN model, where it's not nearly as well calibrated on the right.
So there's actually been a fair number of applications of causal forests already. One by Hitsch and Misra looking at using causal forests to target catalog mailings,
another one by Davis and Heller analyzing heterogeneous impacts of summer jobs.
And then a little bit later, I'll tell you about one that I've worked on with Neil Kelleher and Jann Spiess looking at applications for financial aid.
But first, let's jump in to a more stylized example,
Application: General Social Survey
the General Social Survey. So the General Social Survey, again, is an extensive survey collected since 1972 that
measures demographics, political views, and social attitudes of the US population.
And there was a question that was randomized where some individuals were asked about whether we're spending too much money on welfare,
while others were asked if we're spending too much on assistance to the poor. Again, those are the same thing.
And so the question is seeing, how does wording the question affect the answers?
So here's how we can think about analyzing this, and here we're going to use the GRF package.
Later on we'll talk a little bit more about GRF, which is basically a generalization of causal forests.
So here's the R code that runs the model. And here's the step where we actually
estimate the causal forest.
Verifying Randomization/Balance/Overlap
So the first thing we do is we look and make sure in our data that it looks like this really was randomized.
So we estimated propensity scores. And with those propensity scores, we then can see what's the distribution of
estimated propensity scores in the control group versus the treatment group. And we see that the estimated propensity scores all are very concentrated around
0.5, and they look similar in the control and the treatment group. And that's basically what you would expect if, in fact,
everybody was randomized 50/50. Next, we look at the out-of-bag conditional average treatment effect, and
Out-of-bag Conditional ATE
we look at a histogram that shows the distribution of those. So what we're showing here on the x-axis is the estimated CATE, and
on the y-axis is the count. And so we see this nice distribution where it looks like there's a fair bit of
heterogeneity in CATE, sometimes the treatment effect is as high as 0.5,
other times it's as low as about 0.25. So it looks like our model has found that there is
systematic heterogeneity in treatment effects. However, we don't know yet how well calibrated our model is.
And we want to be very skeptical because there are many, many examples where we're in a low signal environment, and there actually aren't
real treatment effect heterogeneity in the data generating process. So here it looks like there's heterogeneity, but of course,
even if there was no heterogeneity, we would still estimate some dispersion, just like we did with the propensity scores due to sampling variation.
So our next question is, is this heterogeneity that appears here, is it actually real?
And we can figure that out by estimating the model in a training set and then looking at what happens in a test set.
But before we do that, let's take a look at calibration using an approach based on regression.
Quantifying Heterogenity
So we're going to use this method that was formalized in Chernozhukov et al,
2018, that's related to this transformed outcome approach that we suggested in Athey and Imbens, 2016.
So here what we're doing is we're running a regression. We're doing a best linear fit using the forest predictions, and
we're going to do this regression on held out data. And so the regressors are going to be the estimated CATE.
So for each observation, we're going to look at a transformed outcome that represents treatment effects on the left hand side,
actual treatment effects in the held out data. And on the right hand side, we're going to have the CATE.
And what we're going to look at here is what is the coefficient?
Is 1.579 on the CATE.
And so this differential forest prediction is basically the CATE minus the 8.
And it looks like we have a coefficient of 1.57. First of all that's different than zero, which is good,
which means that it looks like when our estimated CATE changes, that is positively correlated with actual treatment effects.
And we can reject that it's one though, it says this is not perfectly calibrated.
And we can also reject that this coefficient is zero which says that there's actually treatment effect heterogeneity.
A related exercise we can do, is to basically break the data into four quartiles of estimated CATEs.
And then looking held out data to see for each quartile of CATE, what is the estimated treatment effect for each of those quartiles.
And we can put confidence intervals around those. So, exactly what we do is we go through k folds of the data.
For fold little k, we hold out that fold. And on the rest of the data, we estimate a model of CATE, for example,
using causal forests. And then using those estimates, we define a mapping from covariates to the quartiles of the k distribution.
So for every x, we assign them one, two, three, four, based on where they are in the distribution of CATEs.
Once we have that estimated, we can apply that to the covariate values x in fold k.
So, that way we've used data outside of fold k in order to build a model,
which we use to assign the units in group K to quartiles.
If I go through this and loop through the case across all the folds, then at the end of looping through all the folds,
each observation has been assigned to one of the four quartiles. And that assignment doesn't depend on that units outcomes, crucially.
If that's the case, then we can average up across everybody that's been assigned to quartile four, or average up across everybody who's been
assigned to quartile one, the treatment effects. So for example, the orange of the sample ATE, that is for each quartile,
we just take the sample average treated minus the sample average control to get the estimate of treatment effects.
And then we just construct standard errors in the usual way. And what we see here is we have some evidence of heterogeneity.
So it looks like, the high quartiles are above the low quartiles. But it's also pretty hard to tell the difference between quartile three and
quartile four. So, but we are able to discriminate quartile one versus two, and
two versus three. The next question we might want to ask is, okay, it's great to understand we can tell
things apart, but what predicts whether you're in a high quartile or low quartile? So, here actually we've divided things even finer.
We've done the same kind of exercise, but now we're looking at deciles.
And so, what we do in this table is for decile one, the low treatment effects,
we look at all the covariates of those individuals and average them up.
And we can compare those to all the average values of the covariates for
units in the tenth decile. And we see in the final column here, we test the hypothesis that those means are equal.
And they're different for all of the covariates except for this other value of political views.
And so, if we then try to interpret this, we're able to say, okay, it looks like there's older people are in the tenth decile.
So that's saying that older people have higher treatment effects. For older people, it matters more whether it's welfare or assistance to the poor.
Higher income people are in the highest decile. They're lower education, but it's not as big a gap here.
And then we see with political views, the low political views are left leaning and the high political views are right leaning.
The treatment effects are higher for the right leaning people and they're higher for men also.
And so, this way of understanding the groups, it avoids some of the pitfalls of trying to inspect a tree and deciding what's important.
And actually in the machine learning literature for forests, there's often this measures of variable importance,
which says how often do the trees float on a variable. We're not giving that type of analysis here.
And it's actually not really a good idea to do that. Because again, with variable importance you can split on one variable.
Let's say income and education are highly correlated, could be you split on income all the time, but that you could have split on education and
gotten a similar set of neighborhoods or similar partition. So here, we've done it more descriptively, we've just said,
let's look at the characteristics of people in decile ten. I don't really care if you split on education or if you split on income,
but I'm looking at the people that you've picked out. Now, one thing that's interesting here is actually income and
education go in a bit of an opposite direction. So, saying it doesn't matter which one you use, is not actually true
in this data set, but it might be similar in a different problem. So, this figure depicts partial effects.
It's basis says we're going to hold fixed all covariates, and we're just going to change liberals or conservative spectrum and
the less income to more income spectrum. [COUGH] And what this picture depicts is that there are,
first of all the relationships are nonlinear. So there's sort of interactions between political views and your income.
And then we also see high conditional average treatment effects for high income are more conservative people, and
low conditional average treatment effects for liberal and less rich people. Now we'll consider another experiment.
FASFA Text Message Experiment
This one was analyzed in collaboration between Stanford ideas 42 and the City University of New York.
And the research questions were about nudging people to fill out financial aid forms and trying to understand for whom nudges are effective.
And how well different targeting approaches do. So, the experiment was run in 2017 and 2018 by Ideas42 and CUNY.
The control group, you got business as usual emails from the college, while the treatment groups got supplementary behavioral emails and text messages.
The people on this study were matriculated students from CUNY community colleges, who had not yet renewed FAFSA in February of the study year.
In 2017, there were 25,000 students from three colleges in the experiment and in 2018, 40,000 students from five colleges.
And so, when analyzing this data, the average treatment effect showed that the on-time submission of financial aid increases by in percentage points,
6.4% points in 2017 and 12.1 in 2018. [COUGH] And that increased early filing rates from 37 to 43% and
38 to 50% respectively. So this was a successful experiment. Just to see what the experiment looked like, the text messages were sent.
And they would say things like, hi, this is your student persistence team. We want to send you a few helpful texts.
And then they would get texts about renewing their financial aid forms.
HTE in the FASFA Experiment
So one of the first things we do is estimate a causal forest to estimate
heterogeneous treatment effects and get these estimates tau hat.
And then when again, we look at calibration using the transformed outcome approach, we put on the left side the transformed outcome, and
we regress that on tau hat of x. And what we see is that the The slope
estimates are significantly different than 0. So when we run regressions,
you're going to test the hypothesis about whether the coefficient is zero. And these p values are all less than 0.05.
So they're all statistically significantly different from 0, but they're pretty noisy. And we also see that the estimators are also far away from one.
So we see there's evidence of heterogeneity, but we see this model is not very well calibrated.
If it was very well calibrated, then if we regress the transformed outcome on tau out of x, we should get a coefficient of 1.
Treatment effect should be lining up with estimated treatment effects.
So again, we're going to do this type of quartile exercise. Again, we're going to hold out one fold of data k, build a model of CATE on the remaining data.
And use that model to build a drive model mapping x each
of four quartiles based on the tau hats from this, the CATE iteration,.
We're going to put the observations into the four quartiles in the holdout fold. And then we'll finally estimate the average treatment effect in each of
the four quartiles for fold k using the outcomes in fold k. And to make use of all our data, we're going to do this exercise across all folds
of the data which is called cross fitting. So we'll average the ATE's for a given quartile across folds.
So here's the results. We look in 2017 and 2018.
And unlike the General Social Survey, we're seeing results are a lot noisier here.
So first of all, actually in 2018 as you go from the first to the second quartile, what we would be
hoping is that the average treatment effect should be going up. Our model says quartile two has higher treatment effects than quartile one.
But in held out data that's not holding up. So basically saying, we can identify what this picture looks like in 2018 is we can
tell apart kind of high treatment effect. People will have the top half of treatment effects and the bottom half of treatment
effects but we can't tell very well the difference between quartile 3 and 4. And we can't tell the difference between quartiles 1 and 2.
Well in 2017, we're able to pick out quartile 1, but we're not able to distinguish between the top three quartiles.
And somewhat sadly, this type of picture is relatively common. This is showing a low signal environment that is,
there's more noise than there is signal. And so when there's a lot of noise and there's not a lot of signal,
the causal forest is kind of just picking up random stuff due to sampling variation. It's not actually distinguishing very well treatment effects.
Now there's some distinguishing here. This isn't nothing and again, in the regression analysis, we saw there was a significant relationship between actual treatment effects and
estimated treatment effects. But it's not super strong, and that's what we're seeing playing out in this picture.
So when we look at which x's are most associated with CATE heterogeneity, enrollment status is the top covariant.
ATE by Subgroup: Enrollment
And to think about this, some students have actually dropped out. So if they were students at the beginning of the year, but they've dropped out by
February, they're less likely to consider enrolling them the next year. And so there's going to be a low conditional average treatment effect,
because they're not interested in enrolling therefore they're not interested in filling out financial aid.
And it turns out if we'd started with this hypothesis, we would have identified strong heterogeneity. If you just distinguish the enrolled and unenrolled students,
we see high treatment effect estimates for the enrolled students. Now the treatment effects are not zero for the unenrolled students and
that's because a lot of students actually come and go from Community College. And some that have dropped out are planning to come back the next year,
but the ones who are nudged more strongly, I mean, who are enrolled have a stronger effect of the nudge.
I also want to emphasize that machine learning kind of comes at a cost here, because we use data to search for heterogeneity.
And that added some noise, and that noise can actually dominate a low signal environment.
Well, if we just focus on this pre specified hypothesis about enrollment, we would find clear separation in terms of treatment effects.
Evaluating benefits of targeted treatment assignment
Now the last exercise I want to do here is to look at using these treatment effects estimates to target a treatment assignment.
So imagine that it's expensive just to send text, then we want to think about targeting only Z% of individuals.
So in this picture here, the percent treated is on the x axis. And what we're going to show here is what is the benefit of treating Z%
of individuals where z is on the x axis relative to randomly assigning treatment.
Now let's focus on this pink line first just to orient ourselves to the graph. We've estimated positive treatment effects.
So the benefit of treating more people if the treatment is randomly assigned is just linear.
So if 100% were treated, we would get this estimate of enrollment.
I mean, in the estimate of filling out financial aid forms, that we estimate for 100% treated.
So on the y axis is how many people enroll? So our estimates show that if we randomly assigned treatment,
if we teach it to people that as we get more people assigned, each of them is going to get that treatment effect.
And then at the end if 100% of people are treated we'll get
these about 43% of students actually filling out financially.
Now these other bars look at what the enrollment rates would be if we use other targeting policies.
So this all of a line here is corresponding to what happens, if we target people according to CATE.
And so if we look, for example, at the first say 12 and a half percent, we targeted those according.
If we pick that 12 and half percent to be the highest CATE people, instead of randomly assigning 12 and a half percent to a treatment,
then we're going to do better. We're going to have higher enrollments, if we target the treatment to the high CATE people.
Then actually the olive line kind of hugs close to this purple line and that saying actually.
If we tried to target, say, 30% of the people targeting high CATE is about as good as just randomly targeting people.
So there are targeting policy isn't that effective. Then we start to see more separation again of these higher percentages.
So, if for some reason we had a budget of treating 60% again, it looks better to do targeting to the top CATE people, rather than randomly assigning the treatment.
But now what are these other pictures? [COUGH] Well, we can then look at what if we
just targeted based on enrollment, so we first sent the text to people who were enrolled.
And we can think about doing that for enrollment or we actually could evaluate it for inverse enrollment.
So we can look at that, and actually targeting
by enrollment looks like it does pretty well.
Especially up in the higher targeting percentages.
We finally can look at baseline and baseline is basically, going to be the baseline prediction
of whether you're going to not fill out your form.
So suppose we targeted people who weren't going to fill out the form, which kind of seems intuitive. We say, hey, people who we think we're not going to fill out the form.
We'll send them text and that will make them fill out the form. But it turns out here that's his red line here,
that's significantly worse than just targeting randomly. So, we don't want to target people who had
a baseline predicted probability of not filling out the form. On the flip side of that, if this kind of awkward lineup here, that's targeting
people who we predicted were already pretty likely to fill out the form. But it turns out the nudge works best on the people who were already pretty likely
to fill out the form. And so we see that this this this aqualine is higher than the pink wine.
And what that saying is targeting by people who were most likely to fill out the form already
will be an effective targeting policy. So, summarizing this picture is sort of showing how you can use something like
a key estimate as an input to something else. In this case, targeting people for text messages.
So I've shown a bunch of examples of forest for causal effects. Now, they're not the only method that can be used.
And indeed, they may not be the most appropriate in every circumstance. For example, many economic data sets have smooth relationships.
Relationships might be monotonic or U shaped. Well forests actually try to fit a line is a step function which is very inefficient.
A variety of machine learning methods might improve upon this, but sometimes their little theory.
For example, neural nets might be a good way to go, but we don't necessarily have reliable statistical properties of them.
So one solution that I've worked on with a former graduate student,
Rena Freeburg, was to introduce what we call local linear forests.
Step Functions (Forests) v. Locally Linear Forest
So to see what goes wrong with forests, here's a picture. There's a true relationship between y and x,
which is illustrated with the black line. And then we look at what are the predictions on a test set
of random forests. And we see here that when there's lots of dimensions and
the forest might get confused, and it ends up fitting a step function to this curve,
which doesn't look very good, especially for high values backs.
We'll call a local linear forest corrects for that, so let me show you how.
Causal Forest v. Locally Linear Causal Forest
Actually, before I do that, let me also show the difference between a causal forest and local linear forest in the example of the general search the survey
where there was the randomization of the treatment. Remember the treatment was what do you ask about assistance before the poor
versus do you like welfare? And what we see here on the x axis is how liberal or conservative you are on the left, and
we see that the causal forest kind of gets flat, you're the boundaries. And that's because it's the average of trees and the trees are having to
build leaves that are big enough to have observations in them. And so when you get towards the boundaries,
you're averaging only data points say to the left of the right boundary,
which tends to kind of flatten out the curves. But what we call the local linear forest does a better job of maintaining this
relationship which turns out it fits better when we look at it test sets, and it does a better job of fitting the true relationship.
We see a similar problem with income that the causal forest flattens out a little bit procedures while the local linear forest does not.
So how does it do that?. Well basically, it thinks about running a regression,
a weighted regression, and the weights are determined
by how close points are to the target point in leaves of the forest.
But then the method also includes, its regression.
And so if we're going to actually estimate a slope coefficient that says how does x affect y?
And by estimating those slope coefficients, we're able to adjust for the slope of the data generating process near boundaries.
So, if a data point is near a boundary we're going to actually estimate the slope of the relationship between X and Y near that boundary.
And even though we don't have data points on the other side of the boundary, we're able to predict what happens at the boundary better by understanding
the relationship between y and x. It's increasing as you lead up to the boundary,
you'll be able to do a better job fitting. And so we have a theorem that says that this works well.
