Introduction
[MUSIC] In this sequence of modules, we're going to look at questions like: are property
rights important for economic development? Does getting health insurance make you healthier,
and are humans causing global warming?
What is causality
But to answer questions like these, we need to know what does it mean for humans to cause
global warming? What is causality exactly?
So to get at this, let's think about some really simple examples from your everyday
life. It's the morning, your alarm is going off, blaring just in your ear, and you hit
snooze and the alarm stops blaring. If you hadn't have hit snooze, it would have kept
going, so by hitting the snooze button, you caused the alarm to stop.
Once you finally get up, you head into the kitchen, time to eat some breakfast. So you
pour a bowl of cereal and you get out some milk, and then you pour the milk into the
cereal. Well, if you hadn't have poured the milk, milk wouldn't have come out the carton, so
by pouring out milk, you caused the milk to come out.
Examples of causality
Now these are pretty simple examples of causality, pretty easy to determine, because you do something
and immediately you see the outcome. In other cases, it's not so easy. So think about your
decision of what to eat for breakfast, say you eat sugar-free cereal with skim milk,
instead of maybe a stack of pancakes with syrup all over the place.
Well, that decision to eat healthy may affect how healthy you are in your old age, but that's
a long time from now. So you can't wait around to see how healthy you are, you have to make
this decision every single day, so how do you know what to do? Even worse, there are
other decisions you may make that may also affect how healthy you are in your old age,
like maybe you exercise everyday. Well, is that good for your old age health? Who knows.
That's a question of causality.
Now, many other people besides you in your daily life face these questions. So suppose
it's the weekend, and you're watching your favorite football team play. Now the game
is almost over, and unfortunately the team is down by seven points. But they do have
the ball. But it's fourth down. So what should they do? Should they go for it or not? And
if they go for it, should they run it, or should they pass it? Well, suppose they go
for it, and to your immense happiness, the running back makes it down to the end of the
field, gets the touchdown, ties the game.
So what caused the touchdown? Was it the decision to go for it, or was it the decision to run
it instead of passing it? Or was it something else all together? Well, if you want to win
football games, it would be really nice to know what the answer is. So that's the question
of causality.
Now businesses, institutions and government face these same questions in their decisions.
Such as: if a firm wants to raise prices, what's going to happen? If Congress passes
a new law, what's going to happen? These are questions of causality.
So basically causality is the claim that if I do something, if I intervene and change
something, some specific outcome is going to happen. If I hit the alarm snooze button
then the alarm will stop blaring, that's a causal claim. So causality is about when we
manipulate policy, what's going to happen to outcomes? So in these modules we're going
to look at a lot of examples of causal questions in public policy and how we answer them quantitatively.

So the goal of these modules is to do a quantitative analysis of causality.
So to do that, we're going to have to measure any variables that we want to understand.
Now a variable is just some characteristic of the Unit of Analysis.
And what I mean by unit of analysis is things like countries, city blocks, people, villages,
firms.
So these are the units of analysis, the things that we're going to analyze, the things that
are in our data sets.
So we have data on different people, data on different countries, data on different
villages.
So the collection of all these units is called the Population.
The population of firms, the population of villages, this is the set of all the people
in the United States, for example, or all the villages in Nigeria, etc.
There are two main variables that we have to measure, the first is the Outcome Variable.
This describes the characteristic that we want to affect, the characteristic that we
want to change.
For example, how healthy you are in your old age.
The second variable we want to measure is the Policy Variable, or the Treatment Variable.
This describes the characteristic of a unit of analysis that we are going to use to change
the outcome variable.
So if our outcome variable is health, then our treatment variable might be whether you
have health insurance or not.
And these are both characteristics of a unit of analysis, for example, a person.
A person has a value of how healthy they are, and a value of whether they have the treatment
or not, whether they have health insurance.
So there are lots of examples from public policy besides healthcare.
For example, if our outcome variable is a measure of economic development, our policy
variable is a measure of how strong property rights are.
Or our outcome variable could be the amount of crime on a city block, and the treatment
variable would be how many police are stationed to that city block.
So more concretely, when we actually do the analysis, we're going to have to pick exactly
how we're going to measure these guys.
So the amount of crime is an abstract concept.
We're going to have to pick exactly how we're going to measure crime.
So for example, we could say the number of car thefts on a city block.
That's something you can just count and look up in your data.
Then to measure treatment, how many police are stationed there, you could, for example,
see did a city block get extra police or not relative to the average level in the city?
For property rights, suppose you want to measure the effective property rights on economic
development.
Well there the outcome variable is economic development.
It's a pretty abstract concept, so in order to do a quantitative analysis, we're going
to have to figure out how do we measure that?
So one way is to just to use GDP, gross domestic product.
That's a number, you can look it up, how it's defined.
Then the treatment variable, this is the thing that we want to affect economic development,
that we have to measure too.
So here it's property rights.
So how do we measure probably rights?
Well, we could define a number that tells us the risk of expropriation by a foreign
government.
So what this means is if you are a company and you invest in some country, how likely
is it that that country's government is going to just take away what you own there?
Take away your oil rigs, your manufacture plants, etc.
If it is not likely at all, then there are strong property rights.
If it's very likely that they're going to take what you own, then there is weak property
rights, okay, and people figure out how to measure these things quantitatively.
Now it's not always easy to measure what we want, and a huge part of research is often
figuring out exactly how to do this, exactly how do you measure difficult things?
So for example, think about how do we measure hope?
Why would we want to do that?
Well, suppose we were interested in knowing whether poor children who have hope have better
outcomes than children without hope, for example.
Do children with hope get more education?
So how do you measure hope?
Pretty vague concept, right?
But there's a paper from 2013, what they did is they asked children to draw a picture of
yourself in the rain.
And then they used characteristics of the drawings, like whether the child has a mouth
or not, whether it's holding an umbrella or not, etc., to define a quantitative measure
of hope.
So I've a few of those pictures here.
So here's one picture: this kid is standing here, he is smiling, he's got a block face,
he's got an umbrella here, and he's got his hand up.
Look how happy he is, this guy is so happy, right?
Now here is another picture: this person is standing in the rainstorm, soaked, doesn't
have an umbrella, is frowning, doesn't look very happy.
Well, based on their quantitative measure of hope, this person is at the 93rd percentile
of hope.
That means they have a lot of hope, they're very high up there.
The second picture, this person is near the bottom, they are in the 15th percentile of
hope.
They basically have nothing.
So there are very, very creative and innovative ways that people have made to measure difficult
concepts like hope.
Now for these modules we're going to assume that this stuff has already been done, that
someone has already figured out how to measure what we want to look at, and the only question
is how do we determine from data on the policy variable, how much hope there is and from
the outcome variable, how much education a poor child gets, how do we determine from
data on that what the causal effects are?
Whether having hope actually does increase the amount of education you may have.
[MUSIC].

Okay, now that we've measured our variables, our outcome variable, and our policy
variable, we move to the first step of data analysis: describing the data.
So for outcome variable, for example GDP, we want to know things like what's the average
GDP across all countries?
What's the largest?
And what's the smallest?
And we also want to know these for the policy variable.
How much property rights there are?
So what's the average amount of property rights across countries?
What's the largest?
And what's the smallest?
That's always the first step in a data analysis.
Now, we ultimately want to learn about causality, and remember causality refers to how an intervention
to change the policy variable affects the outcome variable.
So we must observe variation in the policy variable in the data if we want to learn about
causality, because causality is about what happens when we change something, when we
change the policy variable.
And by variation I mean that the value of the policy variable is not the same for all
units.
So suppose that all countries in our data had the same level of property rights.
Well, that would mean that there's zero variation in property rights in the data, everyone has
the same thing, and that would make it difficult to learn about causality because there's not
any change in the policy variable.
If instead we had some countries that have high property rights and some countries that
have low property rights, then there would be variation in the data, and we'd have some
hope about learning about causality.
Now statistically, variation is measured by using two numbers, the variance and the standard
deviation.
And these numbers are usually always reported in published papers and elsewhere where you
see these kinds of data analysis.
And the way to interpret them is that larger numbers mean there is more variation, so a
larger standard deviation means that there's more variation in the data in that variable.
Now why exactly do we need variation specifically?
Well, learning about causality is going to ultimately boil down to comparing units with
different values of the policy variable.
So comparing countries that have strong property rights with countries that have weak property
rights.
So we can't make this comparison if there's no variation in the policy variable.
Now let's look at an example.
So, in 2012, an Australian nurse, Bronnie Ware, wrote a book called The Top Five Regrets
of the Dying from her experience as a nurse, and here they are: Number 1: I wish I had
the courage to live a life true to myself, not the life others expected of me.
Number 2: I wish I hadn't worked so hard.
Number 3: I wish I’d had the courage to express my feelings.
Number 4: I wish I had stayed in touch with my friends.
And finally number 5: I wish that I'd let myself be happier.
So what lessons can we take from this list about how we should live life if we want to
avoid death bed regrets?
So for example, based on number two, should we work less?
Spend more time at the beach, for example?
Well, from her data it's actually not clear what we should do, because we need to make
comparisons.
What we need to do is compare the regrets of people who worked a lot with the regrets
of people who didn't work a lot, and see if there's a big difference.
But as we'll see in later modules, even that comparison is not good enough for learning
about causality, but it's a good start.
If all we observed was the first group - the regrets of people who had worked a lot - then
there wouldn't be any variation in the policy variable, and we couldn’t made these comparisons.
So to learn about causality, we need variation in the data, and variation in the treatment
and the policy variable.
[MUSIC].

Okay, now that we've measured our variables, our outcome variable, and our policy
variable, we move to the first step of data analysis: describing the data.
So for outcome variable, for example GDP, we want to know things like what's the average
GDP across all countries?
What's the largest?
And what's the smallest?
And we also want to know these for the policy variable.
How much property rights there are?
So what's the average amount of property rights across countries?
What's the largest?
And what's the smallest?
That's always the first step in a data analysis.
Now, we ultimately want to learn about causality, and remember causality refers to how an intervention
to change the policy variable affects the outcome variable.
So we must observe variation in the policy variable in the data if we want to learn about
causality, because causality is about what happens when we change something, when we
change the policy variable.
And by variation I mean that the value of the policy variable is not the same for all
units.
So suppose that all countries in our data had the same level of property rights.
Well, that would mean that there's zero variation in property rights in the data, everyone has
the same thing, and that would make it difficult to learn about causality because there's not
any change in the policy variable.
If instead we had some countries that have high property rights and some countries that
have low property rights, then there would be variation in the data, and we'd have some
hope about learning about causality.
Now statistically, variation is measured by using two numbers, the variance and the standard
deviation.
And these numbers are usually always reported in published papers and elsewhere where you
see these kinds of data analysis.
And the way to interpret them is that larger numbers mean there is more variation, so a
larger standard deviation means that there's more variation in the data in that variable.
Now why exactly do we need variation specifically?
Well, learning about causality is going to ultimately boil down to comparing units with
different values of the policy variable.
So comparing countries that have strong property rights with countries that have weak property
rights.
So we can't make this comparison if there's no variation in the policy variable.
Now let's look at an example.
So, in 2012, an Australian nurse, Bronnie Ware, wrote a book called The Top Five Regrets
of the Dying from her experience as a nurse, and here they are: Number 1: I wish I had
the courage to live a life true to myself, not the life others expected of me.
Number 2: I wish I hadn't worked so hard.
Number 3: I wish I’d had the courage to express my feelings.
Number 4: I wish I had stayed in touch with my friends.
And finally number 5: I wish that I'd let myself be happier.
So what lessons can we take from this list about how we should live life if we want to
avoid death bed regrets?
So for example, based on number two, should we work less?
Spend more time at the beach, for example?
Well, from her data it's actually not clear what we should do, because we need to make
comparisons.
What we need to do is compare the regrets of people who worked a lot with the regrets
of people who didn't work a lot, and see if there's a big difference.
But as we'll see in later modules, even that comparison is not good enough for learning
about causality, but it's a good start.
If all we observed was the first group - the regrets of people who had worked a lot - then
there wouldn't be any variation in the policy variable, and we couldn’t made these comparisons.
So to learn about causality, we need variation in the data, and variation in the treatment
and the policy variable.
[MUSIC].


So causal effects may differ from person to person because people are different.
What that means is there's a distribution of causal effects in the population.
So some people may have a positive effect, some people may have a negative effect.
Now the best case scenario for learning about causality is that we learn the unit level
causal effects for every single person.
So for example, you go to the doctor you have some problem.
He's got a medication he can give you.
If he knows your unit level effect, he will give you the medication if it's positive,
he won't give it to you if it's negative.
We can make individual treatment decisions perfectly based on everybody's unit level
causal effect.
Now if we knew the distribution of causal effects, meaning we know every causal effect
for everybody, we could learn a bunch of interesting numbers, like the percentage of people who
have positive treatment effect.
That would say how many people benefit from having Medicaid, for example, or how many
people benefit from a particular drug.
Now as I mentioned before, the problem is we fundamentally cannot learn unit level causal
effects because we don't see the same person both having treatment and not having treatment.
So typically, trying to learn the unit level causal effect for everybody is just out of
the question, so we just can't do it.
Now, even learning about the distribution of causal effects - which says maybe we don't
know exactly who has the positive effect, who has the negative effect, but we know that
most people have a positive effect, for example - that's also often too much to ask for, and
very difficult to get.
It can be done, but it typically requires many assumptions and is difficult to do.
So what people often settle for is something called the Average Treatment Effect.
The average treatment effect is simply you take up everybody in the population, all your
people, and you look at their unit level causal effects.
That's a number, you write it down on a list, you do that for everybody and then you just
take the average of all of those numbers.
That's the average effect.
Now, that's sometimes a good summary of the overall effect of treatment, but sometimes
looking at just averages isn't necessarily a good thing.
So for example, here I've got this comic for an app called TornadoGuard, what does this
app do?
Well, it plays a loud alert sound when there is a tornado warning in your area.
Well the average star rating four stars out of five - looks pretty good.
Let's look at the distribution of star ratings.
Well, the first guy says, “Five stars.
Good user interface, many alert choices.”
That's nice.
Second person says, “Five stars.
Runs great, doesn't crash.”
Pretty good.
Third person says, “Five stars.
I like how you can set it to multiple locations.”
Okay.
Fourth person, “One star.
App did not warn me about tornado.”
So in some cases you don't necessarily want to be satisfied with the average.
You want to know things about the distribution or the extremes, the maximum causal effect,
the minimum causal effect.
But those are more difficult to get than the average.
So that's why we are going to start from there.
So let’s think about average treatment effects.
So, say we treat everybody.
We give everybody Medicaid.
Then we're going to observe everybody's outcome under the treatment.
So we observe everybody's cholesterol when they have Medicaid.
Now, the average of everybody's outcome in that case is called the Average Outcome Under
The Policy.
Now suppose we do the opposite, okay.
Here we are just doing a hypothetical to get a better understanding of what this definition
is.
So I suppose that we didn't treat anybody.
We don't give anybody Medicaid, then we observe their outcomes.
We observe cholesterol for everybody, and we just take the average cholesterol.
Well that average is called the Average Outcome Without The Policy, and the average treatment
effect is just the difference between the Average Outcome Under The Policy and the Average
Outcome Without The Policy.
That's it.
That's all it is, and that actually is equivalent to the definition I gave earlier that you
take the individual unit causal effects, and you just write them down for every person
and then you take the average of that.
That also will give you the average treatment effect.
So, let's suppose that larger values are better of the outcome.
So for example, GDP: let's suppose that we want more GDP.Then a typical interpretation
of the average treatment effect is that a positive average treatment effect means that
the policy is good.
It means that on average, the treatment effects increase the outcomes.
Because remember, the average treatment effect is the difference between the average with
the policy, and the average without the policy.
So if that difference is positive, it means the outcomes are larger on average with the
policy than they are without the policy.
So if bigger outcomes are better, then a positive average treatment effect means the public
policy is good.
And conversely, a negative average treatment effect means the treatment is bad.
And a zero or very close to zero average treatment effect means the policy has no effect.
That's the typical interpretation for the average treatment effect.
But remember what I mentioned earlier, it's an average so everyone has a different treatment
effect.
Some people are positive, some people are negative, possibly maybe everyone is positive,
that would be nice.
So these distributional features, we should also keep in mind, as I said, that's difficult
to get, so that's why people often focus on the average treatment effect.


So far we've been talking about causality pretty informally, but if we're going to get
any quantitative measures of causal effects, we need to know what exactly do we mean by
causal effect?
So what is the causal effect of say, Medicaid on cholesterol, of having Medicaid on cholesterol?
Well, to answer that, think about one specific unit of analysis, namely, you.
Now what you're going to do is write down every single thing that could possibly affect
your cholesterol, including whether you have Medicaid or not.
Now we're going to define the causal effect of having Medicaid on your cholesterol as
the difference in your outcome, namely your cholesterol level, when you have Medicaid
minus when you don't have Medicaid, holding all those other variables constant, holding
all those other things that could possibly affect cholesterol the same.
That's the causal effect of having Medicaid on your cholesterol.
Now there's a few important points about this definition.
The first is it's a unit causal effect.
It's the causal effect for just you.
It's not the causal effect for everyone, not the causal effect for anybody else, just you.
The second important point is that the causal effect is a difference - holding all other
variables equal.
So what that means is that if we change the values of the other variables, and then look
at the same difference, we might get a different causal effect.
And that's called an Interaction.
So for example, the causal effect of having Medicaid may be zero if you have good eating
habits, or it may be positive if you have bad eating habits.
So if you have good eating habits, maybe you're just generally healthy, so it doesn't matter
whether you have health insurance through Medicaid or not.
But if you have bad eating habits, then maybe you are pretty unhealthy and it actually matters
whether you have health insurance, through Medicaid or not.
So that's called an Interaction Effect: the values of the other variables that we hold
fixed may affect the causal effect for you.
Now both of these points - the fact that it's a causal effect for just you, and the fact
that the other variables, the values of them, may interact with your treatment and cause
you to have a different causal effect depending on whether you have good eating habits or
bad eating habits - those both say that there's heterogeneity in causal effects.
So two people who are not identical might have different causal effects.
And moreover, the causal effect for the same person might be different if the other variables
change.
So basically all I'm saying is that people are different, and so their response to treatment
may be different.
Giving the same treatment to different people may cause different things to happen.
Now more abstractly, we envision there being two potential outcomes.
The outcome when you have Medicaid, and the outcome when you don't have Medicaid.
Now, in reality, we will never ever, ever, ever observe both outcomes, and that's just
because you can't simultaneously be on Medicaid and off Medicaid.
So this is sometimes called the Fundamental Problem of Causal Inference, and the reason
it's a problem is because if we did observe both outcomes — your outcome when you have
Medicaid and your outcome when you didn't have Medicaid — then learning causal effects
would be easy.
You just take the difference and that's your causal effect.
But unfortunately, we don't observe both, and that's a big problem.
And figuring out how to solve that is what we'll do in the rest of these modules.

Remember that each person has a unit level treatment effect or unit level causal
effect, and that's the difference between their potential outcome if they have the treatment
minus their potential outcome if they didn't have the treatment, and the average treatment
effect is just the average of all of these unit level causal effects.
Take each person, look at their unit causal effect, and you take the average.
Now, we can also define the Conditional Average Treatment Effect as the average for just some
of those people.
For example, the conditional average treatment effect for men, where you just look at the
average unit causal effects for men, or the conditional average treatment effect for women,
where you just look at the average for women.
So over here, I have an example in this population there are four people: person one, two, three
and four.
There are two men and two women.
And here I've got their potential outcomes.
So in this column is their outcome if they got treated.
This guy would have a 40, this guy a 20, this woman a 10 and this person a 30.
Over here is their potential outcome if they don't get treated.
30, 20, 15, 30.
So this first person, if he is treated, he gets 40.
If he isn't treated, he gets 30.
So his unit causal effect is 10, 40 minus 30.
The second person gets 20 with treatment and 20 without treatment - it actually doesn't
matter whether they are treated or not, they have the same outcome.
So their unit causal effect is 0, 20 minus 20.
The third person is 10 with treatment, 15 without, so their unit causal effect is -5:
10 minus 15.
And finally our last person has 30 with treatment, and 30 without.
So she also has a unit causal effect of 0.
Now remember, later on, we are going to deal with the problem that in data we never see
both of these numbers for the same person, because each person can only either get treated
or not get treated.
So one of these numbers will always be hidden for us, depending on whether these people
are treated or not.
That's called the fundamental problem of causal inference that I discussed earlier.
And that's going to make it very difficult because we're not going to be able to see
the unit causal effects from the data, and we're going to try to figure out how can we
learn about these things when we have data that only shows us one of the numbers from
these columns.
But before we get to that, we just want to understand the kinds of numbers we can learn
if we observed both of these columns.
So one of those numbers is the average treatment effect, which is just the average of all these
unit causal effects.
So in this example, the average treatment effect is equal to the sum of these: 10 plus
0 plus -5 plus 0, divided by four, because there are four people in the population that
we're averaging over.
So it's going to equal 10 minus 5 over 4.
5/4, that's our average treatment effect.
Now let's look at the conditional average treatment effect for men.
This is the same thing as the average treatment effect, but only looking at the men and the
population.
So we throw out the women’s data.
So that's going to be 10 plus 0, divided by two because we have two people that we're
averaging over, and that's going to be 10/2, or 5.
So finally let's look at the conditional average treatment effect for women, and that's going
to be just like with the men, we're going to look at the average only just the women
and throw out the men’s data.
So that's going to be -5, plus 0, divided by two, because there are two people.
So that's going to be -5/2.
So we see the average treatment effect is 5/4 - positive - so usually we conclude treatment
must be good.
We look at men, we see it's even bigger, so the treatment is very good for men, but we
would say for women the conditional average treatment effect is negative, so we would
say actually the treatment is bad for women.
So what we see here, and also from unit causal effects, is treatment effect heterogeneity.
In this example, the treatment affects different people differently.
This person benefits, this person is hurt, and for both of these people it doesn't matter
whether they are treated or not.
Now when we go to the data, and later on in these models, we're going to see how we learn
these numbers from real data.
Here I computed it, but that's because I assumed I knew both columns, and we're not going to
know both columns.
So how do we learn these numbers?
And there are batch of other kinds of averages you can take, and we will talk about later
on.
For example, there's something called LATE, a local treatment effect.
We will talk about this later — no pun intended.
So those are Average Treatment Effects and Conditional Average Treatment Effects.
[MUSIC].

Causal effects are changes in outcomes due to changes in treatments, holding all
the variables constant.
So when you compare people who are treated with people who are untreated and all other
variables are not constant, we say there is a Confounder.
So a confounder is just anything that's not constant across the treatment group and the
control group, across the people who are treated and people who are untreated.
So what that means is that generally any correlation that you see between having the treatment
and having a good outcome, for example, could be because of these confounders.
So what you should always ask is: Are there any variables which are not constant across
your two groups of people, your treated people and your untreated people?
And if the answer is yes, then confounders might be a problem.
Now, you should also remember that if a particular proposed confounding variable could not possibly
affect your outcome, then it doesn't matter whether it changes across treated people or
untreated people, because it doesn't matter.
It can’t affect outcomes.
So variables can’t affect the outcomes can’t be confounders.
Everything else, however, could possibly be a confounder.
[MUSIC].

After we observe the data, each unit will either have received treatment or not,
and that means that one of the potential outcomes will become an actual outcome — something
that we see in the data.
The other potential outcome will become a counterfactual outcome.
It's the outcome that would have occurred if something different had happened.
So if a unit got treated, then we observe the potential outcome for being treated.
That becomes the actual outcome, and we see what - say a person with Medicaid - gets when
they get Medicaid, what their cholesterol is.
We do not see what their cholesterol would have been if they had not gotten Medicaid,
so that becomes a counterfactual outcome.
So what that means is that the question of causality just boils down to comparing actual
outcomes with counterfactual outcomes.
Or what would have happened if things had been different.
If you hadn't gotten treatment, what would have happened?
Those kinds of comparisons will tell us about causal effects.
Now, since counterfactuals aren't actually observed because they are what didn't happen
or what would have happened, what causal inference methods would do is they'll use various assumptions
to let us observe the unobservable: the counterfactual outcome.
And by doing this, we can make the appropriate comparisons.
So we're going to focus on quantitative methods in this sequence, but you can also use these
ideas to do qualitative causal inference, in say history or anthropology, and in those
fields what you do is you use your knowledge of the historical and cultural contexts to
construct a qualitative description of the counterfactual outcome, of what would have
happened.
So for example here I have a picture of Lincoln giving the Gettysburg Address.
Now this guy here is Winston Churchill.
Now the Gettysburg Address - or the Battle of Gettysburg where Robert E. Lee lost, is
widely considered the turning point of the Civil War.
So Churchill asked, what would have happened if Lee had actually won at Gettysburg?
And he wrote an essay on this.
So it turns out, he is one of the first guys to do causal inference by thinking about the
counterfactual outcome of what would have happened if the Union had lost at Gettysburg.
Now in fact this idea is an entire basis for a genre of literature called counterfactual
history, or alternate history, where people write books and novels about what would have
happened if the US had lost the Cold War etc, etc.
And it turns out this is actually not too different from research.
The authors of these novels have to construct a counterfactual outcome, what would have
happened.
That's the same thing we have to do when we're learning about causal effects.
If somebody got Medicaid, we have to figure out what would have happened to them if they
hadn't gotten Medicaid.
And the main difference between the novelist and the researchers is that researchers have
to really argue strongly that their particular counterfactual outcome is the most likely
to have occurred.
Whereas novelists they don't really have to argue that that's what would have happened,
they just have to think of something that would be interesting and fun to read.
But there is a shared feature between both the novelist and the researchers, and that's
that both stories cannot be refuted.
We cannot refute any given counterfactual outcome, and that's because we just simply
never observed what actually would have happened.
We have no idea, absolutely no idea what would have happened if Robert E. Lee had won.
So your story, however implausible you may think it is - aliens land and take over the
earth - it might have happened.
There's no data that can prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that that would not have happened.
So you can argue that it's probably not what would have happened, but you can never 100%
prove that it isn’t, and that's what makes things difficult.
[MUSIC].

So, now let's turn to a more practical question: how do you actually read an empirical
research paper?
Well, the first secret trick is that you don't read it from beginning to end.
You do not read a paper like you'd read a book, or a newspaper, or anything else, and
for that reason, authors don't write papers like they're meant to be read from the beginning
to end, because they know that the readers aren't going to do that.
So what should you do?
Well first you want to skim the paper to find out four main things.
First: what is the point of the paper to begin with?
What's their main question?
What causal effect are they trying to get at?
Second: what's their main result or their conclusion?
What's their main finding?
Did they answer the causal question they were trying to get?
Third: what's their data source?
Where's their data coming from?
What data are they using?
And fourth: what method or identification strategy did they use to draw their conclusion?
So this first step, where you just skim the paper to find out these four main things,
can usually be done in about five minutes or so, especially if the paper is well written
and if you are very familiar with the particular question in the context, like say the effect
of preschool.
Now, if you're not familiar with the context or the methods, or the paper is not so well
written, it could take a little bit longer, and sometimes debates about the pros and cons
of papers can last for years.
And indeed trying to debate these things and figure out exactly what's going on is part
of the point of ongoing research.
So you are just trying to get a basic idea what the topic is, what the findings are in
your first skim, you don't have to understand everything.
The next thing we want to do is know what the structure is or the typical outline of
a paper.
So it's going to start with the introduction, then it'll maybe talk about the mathematical
model or just a theoretical discussion of the substantive problem they are trying to
tackle.
Next they will talk about the data sources, what data they are using, and where it comes
from.
Then they will talk about the institutional details and give you some discussion of the
particular context of the data and the policy or the treatment.
Then they will give you some summary statistics of their data; you know, some means, some
standard deviations, some mins and maxes, just to give you an idea of what the data
looks like.
Then they will talk about the empirical strategy: what are they going to use to learn about
their main effect?
Which of the identification strategies we've talked on this modules will they use?
Then their main result: what's the main finding, the main take-away from the data analysis?
After that they will give you some other results, stuff that's not as important or interesting
as the main result, but still worth writing up and talking about.
Then they will talk about some robustness checks, trying to explore different alternative
explanations for their main finding, where here really trying to convince you that they
actually found a causal fact of the intriguing variable on the outcome variable.
Finally, they will end with a conclusion, where they’ll just wrap things up and reiterate
what their main finding is, talk about other broader implications, etc.
So that's the basic outline of the paper.
Not all of the sections are always going to be present and they are not always going to
be in that order.
So personally when I pick up a paper, I usually start with the empirical strategy and their
main results, and then I'll work backwards to these other sections.
So put differently, I'm going to start by figuring out what their outcome variable is,
what variable are we trying to learn the causal effect on.
Second, what is the treatment variable?
So we want to know the effect of a treatment variable on an outcome variable.
So what are those in a particular paper?
Then I'm going to look for a table or graph that summarizes the main causal fact that
they find.
Usually, there will be just one table or graph that does that.
For example, just like all the ones we've looked at in these modules.
So once you find a that main table or graph, you can read off what their main finding is,
assuming that everything they did was correct.
So the next - now that I've got the main finding, and I know what they're talking about, I want
know how do they get this, how did they come to this conclusion, how did they get that
number?
That is, what was the identification strategy?
So which of the methods we've talked about in these modules are they using?
So here's where you want to look for keywords like natural experiments or instrumental variables
to tip you off on what method they're using.
Now here you can often stop reading and go do something else if you're not interested
in the further details, because you've got the main point in the paper.
You know their outcome variable, you know their treatment variable, you know what causal
effect they found, and that's pretty much the main point of all research in empirical
social science.
So you can often read a table by just looking at the figures and the graphs, you don't even
have to read the body text.
If you can just find that main table or graph, you're basically done.
Now, suppose you actually are interested in more details about finding or institutional
context - then you want to read on.
The next thing I'll look at is the data sources.
Where do they get their data from?
What exactly are they using?
How do they define their variables?
And then what's the relevant institutional context that I should know about - you know,
the settings about how things actually worked in practice?
This step's going to involve looking at the other tables, like the summary statistics,
and trying to build a context for the main causal effect.
So for example, if the main effect is something about the effect of a policy on students'
GPA, you want to know what's the meaningfully large increase in GPA, so that is, how much
variation is there in GPA in the data?
The summary statistics table will tell you that.
So should I be looking for a 0.2 unit increase in GPA?
Is that a large increase or is it a 1 unit increase in GPA?
I don't know.
That's what we have to find out by reading these other sections.
After you've done that, I will look at the robustness checks.
These are different analyses that are trying to look alternative explanations for the finding.
They are going to claim “I found the causal effect of a policy and an outcome,” and
you might say, “Well, couldn't it be this?
Couldn't be that?”
Maybe there actually isn't a causal effect?
Those are things you going to try to explore in this section, where their main point is
going to be to convince you that their actual main finding is correct.
So last, last but not least, we're going to look at the introduction, the conclusion and
the theory section.
So in the introduction and the conclusion, they are going to try to put their finding
in a broader context of the literature and what we know in general about the effect of
various policies in these settings.
And in the theory section they are want to try to give you a way of thinking about the
situation, thinking about how people are behaving and making choices, and how policy may actually
work in practice.
So the one reason you leave these to last is that often if you know a lot about the
situation, they're just going to be repeating things that you already know, so that's one
reason why people often just skip it.
So this section you want to read, especially if you don't know a lot about the previous
literature and about the context for this finding.
But if you're familiar with the topic you can just skip them, go straight to the main
findings.
So that's an overview of how you should actually read empirical papers.

