Intro
Our next goal is to develop a robust loss function for
heterogeneous treatment effects.
Once we have it, we're going to be able to use it for
treatment effect estimation in a generic machine learning setup.
Just to go over our statistical setting, it's the same as always.
We have Xs, Ys, Ws.
Ws are treatment, Ys are outcomes.
Outcomes are generated in terms of the potential outcomes model as usual.
And what we want to do is estimate the conditional average treatment effect, that
is the expected difference in potential outcomes conditionally on features X.
In this setting, to do this, we're going to assume unconfoundedness,
that is that treatment is as good as random conditionally on covariates X.
And the propensity score, that is the probability
of being treated conditionally on X, is going to play a central role.
So here,
I'm going quickly because this builds on things we've already seen last week.
But essentially under uncomfoundedness,
you can always write that the expectation of Y given X and
W is mu(0)(X), the baseline effect, + W times tau(X).
That is, your expected outcome is baseline effect plus if
you're treated also the treatment effect.
And since there's an expectation, you can also write it
that Yi is actually mu(0)(X) + W tau + epsilon i.
For some epsilon implicitly defined in terms of potential outcomes, where we
know that the property of epsilon is just that it has mean 0 conditional on X and W.
Like when estimating constant treatment effects,
we're going to want to re-express this so that Yi is m(Xi) +
Wi minus the propensity score times the CATE, plus noise.
Where e(X) is the propensity score, m(X) is this kind of marginalized baseline
effect, your best prediction of Y given X without knowledge of treatment.
And once we have this, we're going to land on Robinson's
transformation like before, that is under unconfounded,
and that's Y-m(X) = W-e times tau(X) + mu(0) noise.
What we emphasized last week is that if you were to assume
further that tau(x) = theta is constant across all units.
Then essentially up here,
you could replace this tau(X) with just a constant theta.
And you could estimate this constant treatment effect
parameter by regressing Y-m on W-e.
We talked about properties of this estimator.
And we found that kind of this residual-on-residual regression,
even if you have to estimate m hats and e hats reasonably accurately,
using some machine learning method.
This residual-on-residual regression is going to give
you a central limit theorem and very good guarantees for
estimating theta because of kind of its nice robustness properties.
The difference between last week and today is that now we're not going to assume that
the treatment effect function is constant, that tau(x) is theta for all values of X.
But we're going to let tau(x) vary,
because we want to estimate this tau(x) function more broadly.
And here, essentially the useful thing to notice is that, of course,
we can't do a global regression to recover kind of the single parameter
theta anymore because there is no single parameter theta anymore.
But what you can do is imagine kind of filtering for
each value of X only to the samples at X, and then regressing
Y-m(X) against W-e(X) only for units with a specific value of X.
And kind of what this thought experiment shows you is that by
Robertsons transformation
Robinson's transformation, tau(X), the CATE function,
is actually the minimizer of this following quadratic function.
So tau(X) is the minimizer of this function L,
where L is (Y-m)- tau(W-e(X) squared.
Essentially, what this is telling you is
that if I fix X, and now at a fixed value of X,
I asked you to predict Y-m from W-e,
then tau(X) is the best thing for doing so.
So here I just want to emphasize that this kind of minimization is to
be taken nonparametrically, that is,
tau is no longer a number that minimizes some objective function.
But tau is a function of X, where at each value of X, tau(X) can be unrestricted.
But it actually turns out that the CATE function, the thing we want,
is a thing that over the population at each value of X,
minimizes the expectation of this loss function or this quadratic function L.
So it might seem like I haven't done much here.
I just took the CATE representation, I rearranged it a little bit.
And I noted that from this rearranging,
we see that tau(X) can be characterized as this
minimizer of this quadratic functional.
But it turns out that actually,
if you're thinking about estimating tau(X), this is super helpful.
Lasso
And just to kind of give one example, Let's think back to the lasso.
So here, you just saw this a few weeks ago.
The lasso, usually we think of it as a method for prediction.
We want to use the lasso to predict Y from X.
And we're going to use the lasso if we think that there's a linear
model that's good for predicting Y from X.
But this linear model may be very high dimensional.
The number of the parameter in the model p may be much larger than n.
And in this setup, what the lasso does is it tries to predict Y from X.
So it minimizes a squared error loss.
But linear regression would only minimize this red thing.
So it actually kind of finds the beta that predicts Y from X the best in a sample,
but the lasso does something else.
It adds this L1 penalty of beta to the objective also.
Where kind of what this is saying is it's looking for
parameter vectors beta that predict Y from X well, but kind of with a preference for
simpler parameter vectors beta, the small L1 norm.
There are many reasons to like this, kind of putting this L1 norm here
reserves sparsity, and it makes sure that kind of predictions is kind of
good prediction's still a meaningful objective in high dimensions.
But anyway, so this is the lasso, this is something people do a lot.
And now,
a natural follow-up question would be, let's say we're still in high dimensions.
We still like linear models, but
We don't want to just have a high dimensional linear prediction model.
We now have x's, y's and also treatments w.
And we wanted to fit a cate function of tau of X,
where now tau of X is linear in X, but where X is high dimensional,
so beta is a high dimensional vector.
How can you fit this beta?
This might seem like a tricky problem that you kind of have to think about for
a long time to come up with appropriate methods.
But actually kind of once you realize that machine learning is
about minimizing loss functions in some specific way.
So kind of any specific machine learning algorithms should combine a loss function
and kind of an algorithm by which you minimize it.
Well, how do you think about the lasso?
The lasso, here's the loss function, that's in red.
And the thing in blue,
that's like the algorithmic choice that makes it the lasso.
You don't just kind of minimize the loss directly, but you make it
fit a linear model and you end one penalize the coefficients for sparsity.
So what are we going to do for fitting cate?
Well, again, we want to run something like the lasso, so
we're going to linearly parameterize our CATE predictions.
Our CATE prediction, we're going to have to form x beta, and
we're going to put an L1 penalty on the parameters beta.
On the other hand, whether we're going to use the loss function.
Well, instead of using squared error loss like for prediction,
we're going to use this loss from the previous slide.
I just described that is kind of the thing you get out of Robinson's
transformation and essentially the claim is that the problem is essentially solved.
You want to have a lasso-like estimator for the CATE,
just run the lasso, but swap out your squared error loss for
this CATE appropriate loss function and you're in business.
So there of course is one wrinkles of the problem, and that gets kind of
Loss Functions
a wrinkle we've seen many times, which is that this loss function here.
It depends on, can remember, that this loss function
is something that you want it to just depend on the data x,
y w, and tau, the thing you want to estimate.
And then you'd kind of want to find tau that minimizes the loss function,
averaged over the data with some regularization.
But the problem is that, in this loss function, you don't just have your x, y,
w and tau.
You also have M and E, these kind of other functions that are just hanging out there.
You're not interested in them, but
you can't form the loss function without having them and this is a problem.
If you knew then what I just described would have been exactly
the same as what we saw in the earlier slides with inventory management.
That is, there was a task, there was a loss function.
You learn your decision rule by minimizing that loss function and
there's nothing else to say.
But here, we can't actually form our loss function,
because the loss function depends on these M's and
E's which are unknown, and so what are we going to do?
I think given the theme of the class, it's quite clear what we should do.
That is we're going to need to first somehow estimate M hats and
E hats using some first step regressions, this is what we did.
First meeting concentrating the effects using Robinson method,
this is what we did in causal forests.
This is what we're going to have to do again, and
then the question is, can you still learn CATE
using this kind of loss function on if M hat and
E hat were learned from data.
R Learner
But luckily I believe the answer is yes, so
this is an algorithm referred to as the R-learner.
Kind of extending the alphabet soup for different types of algorithmic strategies.
You can think of four generic machine learning based CATE estimation and
the R-learner involves first fitting M hat and
E hat by learning to predict y and w respectively from x.
And then what we're going to do is we're going to form this loss function here,
but with cross fitted plug in values of M and E.
And then we're going to fit tau hat by minimizing
this loss function with plugg-in values of M and
E, and this term here, this lambda n,
this is kind of some amount of some type of regularizer on tau.
The regularization could be explicit, give us the lasso,
then tau is actually going to be of the form x beta and
your regularizer is going to be an element of beta.
But in other types of settings like if you wanted to minimize this loss function by
boosting or by deep nets, then this lambda n could be something much more implicit.
For example in deep learning, one common idea is to
regularize the network using this technique called dropout,
where you kind of get training randomly, commit some nodes from the network.
That gives you a type of regularization, but
it's more implicit, but anyways with this notation,
I'm trying to capture both explicit and implicit regularization.
And anyways, the formal result is, and
I'm not going to go into here, because kind of just
stating it is more technical than what I want to do now.
But the point is that you get similar robustness properties,
as we saw with Robinson's method,
with constant treatment effects, and as we saw with AIP w,.
That is, as long as you estimate M hat and E hat, using reasonable accuracy,
then your guarantees going to indicate using this kind of loss function,
are as good as you would have gotten using kind of a power,
are perfectly known M and E in the loss function.
So the reason I don't want to talk about this is, we haven't in this class talked
about, say optimal rates for estimating functions over nonparametric classes.
So even kind of talk about what would be a good rate of convergence of tau hat.
With tau hat under different regularity assumptions on the function
class containing tau of x tend to be a long aside from the class.
So I'm not going to go there, but the main point is that, if M hat and
E hat are reasonably accurate, then you can get guarantees for tau hat that
are as good as though you had plugged in the true values of M and E into the loss.
And it's possible to get guarantees with tau hat, where tau hat converges and
squared their loss much faster on order of magnitude faster than M hat or E hat.
So this is a nice property, this is a property we saw out of say,
constant treatment effect estimators This is not a property
that any of the meta learners we talked about last week have.
So that s t and x learners, in general, are not going to have
a property where they can achieve faster rates of convergence for
the CATE, than they do for their nuisance component estimates.
Claim
But, so anyways, the claim is that kind of the R learning framework.
The claim is that you can essentially do most things you want
to do in the world of CATE estimation by just first estimating m hat e hat,
then forming this as your loss function.
And then just applying machine learning generically using this loss function.
In the next part of this lecture, I'll go into more details of how
you can use this loss function for model choice, for model validation.
So you can use this loss function for cross validation, or for
comparing causal force or the x learner, for example.
But in this segment, I'll focus on kind of using this loss function for
just kind of learning tau directly.
That is we're going to try to get tau of x by
minimizing this loss function by a different means.
Example
And, okay, just one example showing kind of a semi-synthetic example
where we see kind of the different trade offs and choices involved in doing so.
So this is an example motivated by this paper by Arceneaux
et al on the effect of get-out-the-vote-calls on turnout.
So, we're going to take the real data, this data set has confounding,
essentially because, and it's documented in the paper.
In some districts, you were more likely to get called than other districts,
essentially, based on the competitiveness of the election.
So it has a selection of the unobservable thing,
that is kind of you need to control for some x's to get rid of that.
But what we know also is that there's essentially no treatment effect.
This is because, kind of, and is the point made in the paper also,
this paper is trying to measure the effect of one get-out-the-vote-call on turnout,
and for all intensive purposes, right?
One phone call,
think about how many phone calls one might get during the competitive election.
The effect of one phone call alone is essentially zero.
So the main point of the paper was that here's a setup where obviously
the treatment effect has to be zero.
But if you don't control for confounding carefully,
you'll find something that's not zero.
But anyways, for our purposes, what we're going to do,
is we're going to take the real data,
assume that the treatment effect is actually zero in the original data.
And then we're going to spike in a little bit of synthetic
treatment effects by strategically flipping some outcomes.
So now, we've spiked in a treatment effect, and the question is,
can we use various machine learning-based methods to recover it?
So here you see a histogram of the magnitude of the CATE we've spiked into
the problem.
And what do we need to do or
to carry this out using our learner approach?
So, what we're going to do, is first we need to learn m hat and
e hat that is to predict y and w from x respectively.
Then we're going to need to combine all this into the R-loss and
then we're going to need to run some third machine learning step,
where we use the R-loss as the loss function for learning.
So, first, we need to fit e hat and
m hat of course, and here for both tasks,
we tried both the lasso and boost.
And in both cases, we can cross-validate it and see which one was doing better.
And in both cases,
cross-validation told us that boosting was more accurate than the lasso, yeah.
So then we got crossfitted e hat and
m hat estimates from boost.
Then in the second step, what we're going to do is we take the R-loss or
the R-objective, and we're, again,
going to try to minimize it using lasso or boost.
So for lasso, we're going to run lasso on the R-loss objective,
so we're going to do just what I described earlier.
That is, we're going to do this except here instead of using
the L that depends on the true unknown,
the m and e, we're going to run this with plug in values of m and e.
We're also going to consider boosting.
If you know what boosting is, then we're just going to run boosting as you know it,
but we swap out the squared error loss with R-loss.
If you don't know what boosting is, well, then,
you can just know that if you wanted to do this, all you'd have to
do is read about boosting and then swap out the loss function.
But anyways, we ran this and then we cross validated again based on R-loss,
not squared error loss, and here cross validation prefers the lasso.
So we ended up getting m hats and e hats out of boosting, but a final fit for
tau of x, that's going to be linear in x and fit by the lasso.
And, So
now what's nice is that this is actually the semi-synthetic, kind of in the end,
we know what the true tau of x was, so we can see how well we did.
And we were right, our mean squared error kind of scaled
up by a 1,000 for the R-lasso with 0.47,
whereas, kind of R-boosting would have gotten 1.23.
So kind of cross validating on the R-loss not only helped us train the lasso well,
but help us correctly notice that the lasso was doing better than boosting here.
On the other hand, other things you might have tried here is you might have
been interested in kind of, Just kind of
fitting everything by a single lasso, something like that x lasso.
Here, that did worse than the R-lasso, or you could have just kind of thrown,
I haven't talked about it here much, but BART,
it's a popular Bayesian crit approach and here it also is less accurate.
So, The main point is that, again,
this kind of R learning approach is flexible,
once you're using it, everything just looks kind of very
familiar, From kind of a machine learning workflow.
You pick the best e according to squared error loss,
you pick the best m according to squared error loss,
you pick the best R according to tau loss and then you proceed.
So this is one thing you can do.
Stacking
Another kind of Nice application just to show that
kind of once you have a loss function, you can really do a lot of things with it.
So one popular idea in machine learning is what's called stacking.
Stacking starts from kind of you have capital K different estimates.
You say you have kind of K experts you hired to give you CATE estimates.
And they all give you different estimates, and now you don't know which one to pick.
And really, you think maybe all your experts are onto something and
maybe they're onto something slightly different.
So you'd want to find a consensus estimate that kind of averages all of your experts'
predictions.
And let's say you wanted a consensus estimate, that's here,
some offset plus a positive weighted average of all the tau k's.
So you don't want to insult anyone.
You don't want to give any of your experts negative weight in your model.
But kind of what this thing could do is it could
just kind of say the fifth expert is the best.
So just set tau(x) to tau 5, or
it could kind of give some positive weight to a number of different experts.
And then, of course, if you want to stack the remaining questions,
how do you pick these weights out the CATE?
How do you choose how much weight to give each expert?
And, This might seem like a difficult problem,
but again, once you have a loss function for CATE, it's very clear what to do,
just, Write tau(x) in the form as usual, and
then fit these parameters by minimizing the loss function for CATE.
And here, the kind of only difference from what we do usually is that
there's also this constraint saying that here,
the parameters we want to learn are these alphas, mostly.
And we're going to add a constraint that these alphas should be positive.
Solving this optimization problem,
this is going to be kind of a quadratic objective with positivity constraints.
It's a quadratic program.
If you kind of want to learn how to solve this kind of optimization problem,
you can, say, take a class in complex optimization.
But the point is that once you have this loss function kind of work
to do is immediate, and then kind of all the difficulties are just
routine machine learning type difficulties.
Say, how do you solve a complex optimization problem?
And just kind of to see this working, again, here,
Simulations
we had one example where there's a simulation study.
I won't go into details here, but kind of this paper,
there's a reference on the last slide to this one if you want to read more.
But essentially, in a pair of simulation studies, we tried building causal forests.
So this is kind of complicated forest-based method, right,
that does a lot of things.
Causal forests, like the R-learner, are built on this Robinson based insight.
But, of course, causal forests aren't the direct consequence of kind of Robinson's
transformation.
There's a lot more going into it kind of how exactly we chose to implement
the algorithm.
Then I tried running something else here.
I tried running BART.
BART is, like I mentioned earlier, it's another popular tree-based method,
but kind of based on hierarchical Bayesian model.
So algorithmically, it's very different.
And tried fitting causal forest, tried fitting BART.
Which one is better?
Well, at least in this one, what's interesting is you see,
I tried stacking causal forest and BART using the method from the previous slide.
And what you see in green here is the mean squared error for the stack estimator.
It actually ends up being better than either causal forest or BART on their own.
So guess this makes a couple of points.
First, in machine learning, kind of this inherently an engineering focused area.
So what's going to work best?
It's kind of unpredictable.
The kind of best thing to do generally is to be empirically driven and
try a bunch of things and see what works.
And the other thing is in order to be empirically driven,
you need a criterion of success or failure.
Otherwise, you're kind of flying blind, and the claim is that of CATE estimation.
The R-loss provides one such measure of how accurate the CATE estimate
is that you can use for many purposes, ranging from learning to model averaging.
