The last thing I want to talk about is policy learning.
In this lecture so far, we worked in a setting with
features x outcomes y treatments w potential outcomes.
And we wanted to estimate in the setting the conditional average treatment effect.
Policy learning is a problem that's in the same setup, except instead of
asking what does the conditional average treatment effect look like?
Instead of asking you to describe the treatment effect function,
with policy learning ask you to do is to be prescriptive to actually make
recommendations about who should be treated and who should not be treated.
So, specifically a treatment assignment policy pi is a mapping from
your feature space x for recommendations 01.
Given your features, should I send you the treatment?
Or should I send you to control?
And the problem of policy learning is to use data to find a good policy
of this type.
Now, the problem of policy learning and
the problem of CATE estimation are obviously very closely related.
But there are some subtle but crucial differences.
One important difference is the end goal.
The end goal of CATE estimation is to accurately estimate tau of x.
The goal of policy learning is to learn a policy that achieves high
welfare that is when you deploy it, it makes the right recommendations for
people so you get high rewards on average.
If you're trying to do policy learning, and as a byproduct,
you get a reasonably accurate estimate of tau of x, but
this doesn't help you make good decisions,
then in terms of the goals of policy learning, that's not much use.
So, the last thing I want to talk about in this lecture is to introduce
formalized upon policy learning, and then to say a few words about how
to learn good policies in our last based machine learning setup.
The assumptions are the same as always,
so, I'm not going to go through them in more detail.
The interesting thing though,
the thing that's new is this notion of a policy that maps again x to 0 or 1.
And then the associate notion of a value of a policy.
The value of a policy is an answer to the question, if I sampled everyone I ID,
then when I see your covariance xi, I send you to treatment arm pi of Xi,
if pi of xi comes out zero, I send you to control.
If pi of xi comes out when I send you the treatment, then the value of a policy
measures what would be the average outcome under the sampling design,
where I assign treatment according to the policy pi, or equivalently,
I get to see the potential outcome that's the one chosen by the policy.
So, writing down the value of the policy, it's very simple,
it's just that expectation of the potential outcome chosen by pi,
there's a lot kind of packed into this notation though.
So, if this seems confusing at first, it may may help.
It may make sense to just like meditate on it for
a few minutes to kind of understand what this notation is doing.
But so anyways, we're going to assume here that outcomes are good.
Come to wise, you'd want to get higher rather than lower values of y and so
the goal is going to be to find a policy that makes bf pi large.
So, in order to kind of get more intuition about this problem,
one helpful thing to notice is that you can write
the value of a policy V of pie as in two parts expectation of Yi 0.
That is just the average outcome you get from the average outcome
in the control arm or equivalently, the value of a policy who sends everyone
to control plus a second term expectation of tau of x times pi of x,
which essentially says, how does the value of your policy
change due to the fact that you send some people to treatment.
This formula is intuitive, right?
The value of a policy is the value of doing nothing plus the value
of doing something as recommended by your policy, but
something we immediately see from this is that essentially,
you'll get high utility out of a policy if you treat people
who have a large treatment effect.
So, in other words here, if you just wanted to have the largest outcome
possible on the optimal policy pi would treat people with a positive
treatment effect and not treat people with a negative treatment effect.
If you have some cost of treatment or a budget constraint,
then still you'll see that kind of,
in a lot of generality that optimal nonparametric design and
policy pi would just threshold on the tau of x threshold that C.
So your optimal policy would be at the form pi of x
is indicator power of x is bigger than C.
So, at first glance, this reduction might really make it seem that
there's nothing much to policy learning beyond Kate estimation,
but, again, the more you look at it, the more there is.
The first point is that, okay, it's true that nonparametricly,
the optimal policy is one that thresholds of tau at C.
This doesn't mean that the optimal thing to do with data is
to first learn a case estimate tau hat and then have you policy threshhold tau hat.
Why?
Well, so far, we've talked about ways of estimating tau of x that essentially
try to get estimate tau of x as accurately as possible under squared error loss, but
actually squared error loss putao of x is not necessarily the correct loss function
before really kind of emphasizing the objective we care about in policy learn.
The second point.
So the first point is mystical.
The second point is more practical but also very important.
It's that as soon as we move away from just describing
the data to actually recommending action,
there is a large number of things we need to take into
consideration that weren't there before.
For example, is your policy gamable?
Or there might be some features x that you observe in your data,
but you know that if you start using them for decision rule,
then people will just start gaming their features and that will break your policy.
So you don't want to use those.
Another important one is, is it legal or
ethical to use some variables x in your policy?
I'm going to return to them again example later on and
talk about kind of optimal policies or utility maximizing policies for
prioritization eligibility to the welfare to work program.
And this is a setting.
We have gender in the dataset.
Does tau of x vary with gender?
It may or may not.
It's not up to you, right?
When you're just describing the data.
You should just try to describe the data as accurately as possible.
But then when it comes to actually recommending eligibility for
the program you're not allowed to discriminate based on gender.
So your policy pi should not use gender as a variable
in determining who gets access to the program or not.
So this is again, another dimension.
This wasn't a statistical consideration.
This was more a consideration saying that, yes non parametrically the optimal
policy will be one that thresholds on Kate, but just thresholding on our backs.
It might give him the variables x in your data set may not be feasible policy or
may not even be a legal policy.
So you want to learn policies pi that can satisfy
constraints that are required by the application.
All right how are we going to do this given being this lecture hopefully.
It's pretty clear the goal is to come up with loss function in
a policy learning and then to learn using this loss function.
With the loss function should be?
It's pretty clear.
We want to find welfare maximizing policies.
So our loss is going to be negative welfare.
Or we could just have here try to make all the machine learning
procedures be argument over the loss.
But you could also think of machine learning is doing argmax over estimated
welfare.
And that's entirely fine also.
So that's what we're going to want to do.
And the big question is just how can we design a loss
function that is feasible in terms of the data
that we can optimize and use for learning?
And when you first see this this might seem tricky.
But there's a very nice solution.
At first thing you can do this very simple.
It's nicely just pressing this Kitagawa and Tetenov.
What they notice is that you can actually get a very simple
estimate of the value of a policy by inverse propensity weighting.
And how is it going to go?
Well, we want to estimate the average reward if we were
to give everyone treatment according to policy pi.
Well what this is going to do, IPW policy evaluation
is going to do, it's going to look at all samples for
who treatment matches the policy.
If during treatment doesn't match the policy, then IPW won't consider them.
And then it'll just take an average of the outcomes for all samples,
where kind of the treatment actually matched your policy pi.
But of course, you're going to be missing some samples.
So you need to kind of correct for
your sampling bias like an average treatment effect estimation,
and you do this by kind of inverse propensity weighting.
You can check that if the propensity scores or
kind of the probability that Wi is equal to pi of Xi is known,
then this inverse propensity weighted value estimate B
hat pi is unbiased for the Karoubi pi.
So, this is a reasonable value estimate.
And then a machine learning approach might just kind of take this be hot be had pi.
That we got out of this IPW construction.
And then learn pi hat by just maximizing
over V hat pi in a machine learning sense.
So in some sense, you can just do that.
In another sense, what's interesting is that this objective function is actually
quite different from the type of objective functions we've worked with before.
Before kind of in prediction, we work with squared loss.
And for estimating Kate's, we work with the AR loss,
which is essentially like a modified recenter square loss.
So, learning always amounted to kind of going down
a quadratic looking objective with some regularization.
Here, it looks very different.
So what's going on here is we have, right we're optimizing over policies pi.
And the policy pi the way it enters into this value function
is kind of through all the recommendations you make at the samples I have two n.
So I only care about the policy
pi based on does it recommend 0 or
1 at all my training samples and
then based on this kind of if pi matches
Wi then I get awaited version of Wi into
my sample, otherwise I don't.
I'm not going to say much about this.
Here other than actually carrying out learning with this kind
of 01 type of decision rule is very different kind of algorithmically
than carrying out learning with a squared error loss type objective.
And Solving this problem is actually very closely related,
it's formally equivalent to solving a weighted classification problem.
You could qualitatively think that what you're trying
to do is you're trying to conceptually classify people
into the correct Treatment.This is not quite true.
But in terms of the optimization routine, it looks a lot like that.
So, and one example, this is that, if you want to try this,
we have this package policy tree that
actually solves this objective over the space of trees.
And then if you're curious about the details of
how this reduces to a classification problem,
we also go into it more in the package documentation.
So this is IPW, things work nicely, inverse propensity
weighting gives you when the propensity scores are known,
a nice unbiased estimate of the value of a policy that you
can optimize overstate the space of decision trees and
this Gives you a nice way of learning policies.
Is there anything left to be said?
Well, so far in this class, I've generally not let you stop at the point where
you had an algorithm that worked well when propensity scores were known.
In an observational study, you might worry whether if these propensity scores are not
known, so you need to estimate them.
And you could of course try running IPW with estimated propensity scores here,
but that wouldn't be particularly robust.
Can we do anything else?
Well, remember last time we saw it IPW, it was for
average treatment effects estimation.
And then we realized that there was a double robust alternative to IPW, AIPW.
AIPW had these nice robustness properties where it could recover from
propensity scores that were perfectly estimated.
And this gave you better properties for average treatment effect destination.
It turns out that in policy learning, the same thing is true.
These things here, these are what's called double robust scores.
If you remember with AIPW does, AIPW estimates the average
treatment effect by taking the average of these gamma hat guys.
So I'll just write it down here to be specific
tau hat AIPW is equal to one over N, sum I equals one up to n.
Gamma hat i where the gamma hat i's are just the things we had before.
It turns out if you want to do double robust policy learning,
what you can do is you build the same double robust scores and
then you set up an objective much like before.
Except now you can think of what this is doing,
is you trynna classify people into treatment or control.
Here I centered this, so this thing here is plus one if you're treated and
minus one of your central control.
And with this welfare objective measure does here,
essentially there are these double robust scores which are noisy proxies for
the treatment effect you get for treating the eighth person.
And essentially, if I send you the treatment, I earn better overall score.
If I send you to control, then I pay that double robot score and
a good policy would we want that usually one, and
regions a feature space where frequent effects are positive.
So gamma hat i are on average going to be positive.
And the policy sends people to control, and
has this thing, the -1 in regions of feature space,
where gamma hat i is usually negative.
So again, this is also implemented in policy tree.
So, just to see this in action, I'm going to go back to the GAIN study
we talked about earlier, and here, we're just going to do this.
I'm going to form the same double robust scores as before.
And then the way we're going to learn policies is by maximizing this objective.
We need to somehow regularize, and here the way I'm going to regularize
is I'm going to tell you, your decision rule can be any Depth K tree.
I'm going to try K equals one and k equals two.
So essentially, I'm going to ask my algorithm to just kind
of look over the space of all the trees of depth k.
And then see which one maximizes my estimated welfare objective,
I have here that's all we're going to do.
And then I'm going to deploy that tree.
And if we run it here, then this is the output you get kind of a lot of math and
nonparametric statistics went into producing this tree.
But the outcome is that in the game study we talked about earlier.
The best depth to tree or what we claim is kind of in terms of welfare,
a depth to tree that's essentially as
good as any depth to tree can be is the fall.
It first looks Was a person paid three quarters ago if yes you treat
them if they're high school graduate if no you treat them if they have dropped.
All right, this is a recommendation that, okay,
the claim is that from a utilitarian perspective, this does a very good job,
allocating treatment to those who going to be most responsive to it.
Some comments, like I mentioned earlier, when you're making
policy recommendations there, of course, things you're not allowed to do.
Here, we had data on race and gender in the dataset.
But given that you're not allowed to, and
it wouldn't be ethical to discriminate based on these.
We just forbid the tree from splitting on race or gender.
There are other things that are going on here.
We're looking at,
do the people have children in choosing with treat them or not?
Is that okay?
I think at some point, it's not up to kind of statisticians
economicstrians to decide that's up to the kind of stakeholders
to see whether this is a decision role or they're okay with or not.
And one thing I like about this kind of policy learning over the space of trees
approach is that in the end your recommended policy is a very simple tree.
Then hopefully even people without mathematical training can engage with.
So then you don't need to kind of in the abstract have an opinion about whether
this tree is a deployable policy or not in terms of parents criteria.
You can just go ask stakeholders, whether they like it or
not and then take it from there.
You might also ask is this policy any good or not?
And here,, of course, what criteria are we going to use for
assessing the quality of the fit?
Well, of course, we can adjust use our estimated welfare as the criterion.
So we're going to do some kind of cross validation type stuff,
where we're going to kind of on one part of the data try to learn a policy.
And then another part of the data evaluate,
which was what is the average value of this policy?
And pick that policy as well in terms of evaluation on this loss.
And here we see that essentially learning in terms of depth to trees.
The picture I showed you earlier, in terms of out of sample,
we're kind of cross validation type devaluation on the welfare metric.
Our does well relative to everything else, so you notice there are two columns
here in the left column I'm Kind of working in the same regime I talked
about earlier, where I pulled the four small experiments into one and
then just kind of tried to estimate propensity scores.
So this is an evaluation of how well we're doing in terms of estimated
propensity scores on the right here.
He cheated, and I went and brought back the true randomization probabilities
in order to get an objective assessment and actually check that, yes.
This policy is measurably better than the random in
a way that we can validate by looking at the true randomization problems.
Anyways, I went very quickly here,
because we've talked about many things in this lecture already.
In terms of references, for the second half, again,
if you want to read more about policy learning,
then this kind of a cursory introduction and I gave here,
I'd recommend first starting from this paper by Kitagawa and Tetenov.
They set up the problem very nicely and they propose the IPW,
our base estimator there.
And then what we do in this paper is we kind of propose
the double robust policy learning estimator,
a propose study then estimator.
Also if you want to read more about the GAIN application and
policy learning, then we talk about that in detail here.
In terms of the first half of the lecture, so that is,
robust loss functions for estimating TAUbig itself,
the presentation today, followed most closely,
this biometrical forthcoming paper, where in particular
the examples I showed about say starking, barked and
causal force, they're taken from there if you want to learn more.
So this paper outlines the methodology for our learner and
has some kinds of preliminary formal results.
But more recently, there's a pair of papers that has kind
of gone much deeper into this, proving much more general and
also more powerful results about our learner type estimators.
So, the two here are this paper by Foster and Syrgkanis,
and the other is by Kennedy.
So, again, if you're interested in theory for this kind of stuff,
these are two very nice papers to read.