Introduction
Hi, everyone.
Welcome back to machine learning and causal inference.
The overarching pitch of this class is so far has been something like this.
We need to understand causal effects in order to do good data
driven decision making causal effects are out there,
they're defined in terms of potential outcomes.
They exist before you collect any data.
And they certainly exist before you even think about applying any method to
the data.
So if we talk about machine learning and causal inference,
we talk about causal effects as kind of these fundamental objects.
That are in nature and machine learning as a set of tools that helps
you better understand and estimate these causal effects.
In particular, machine learning provides
a set of tools that are helpful whenever you have large or
particularly complicated data sets you want to use understanding causal effects.
So, this is a story we've talked about quite a bit so far.
And in doing so, really focused on the causal inference, signs of the story and
try to build some bridges, from causal inference towards machine learning.
One part of the story we focused a little less on is the machine learning
side of things, and kind of what is machine learning really?
One thing to note is that by now in social sciences,
most people have had some exposure to machine learning, but
mostly to a very narrow slice of machine learning involving prediction problems.
A lot of people will think of machine learning essentially as the thing,
you go to when you're looking at you when you have a large database of images,
images of cats and dogs.
And you want to use these images to train an algorithm that can distinguish cats and
dogs in a way that can generalize to new unseen data.
And if that's your task then machine learning is the place you go look
looking for methods.
But if you talk to engineers, they might tell you that this is actually
a fairly narrow view of what machine learning is.
There's a huge number of tasks out there that fit under the general umbrella of
machine learning.
And prediction task is just, it's a very nice and kind of very high impact
area of machine learning, but it's still a pretty small slice of the pie.
Trying to give a general definition of machine learning, like for
any area is a delicate thing.
But if you wanted to attempt to do so, some ingredients, you'd certainly need is
that a machine learning problem involves a task, something you're trying to do.
It involves a loss function, something that rewards you, or
punishes you for performing the task well or poorly.
And then it involves data that you can use to learn an algorithm.
That can perform the task well according to the loss function.
So, if you think about your image classification task,
distinguishing cats from dogs, it clearly fits under this perspective,
with task is recognizing cats and dogs.
Your loss is one if you get the classification wrong and
zero if you get it correctly.
And then you just want to use these images to learn to classify accurately.
It fits can obviously under this umbrella.
But another completely different task that still fits into this umbrella could be
flying a helicopter.
Your task is to keep the helicopter up in the air.
Your loss function is zero as long as you're in the air, it's one if you crash,
and your task, well, it's to fly the helicopter while maintaining a low loss,
that is while staying in the air.
What's the data you want to use?
We'll hear it could depend,
you could have access to videos of professional pilots flying helicopters.
Or you could give your algorithm access to a flight simulator where they can
try different flight strategies and see what works and what doesn't.
And again, this might look completely different from a prediction problem,
but if you talk to engineers, this is certainly something that would fall
under the umbrella of machine learning.
And it's also certainly, a problem that involves a well defined task,
a well defined loss function and using data to optimize that loss.
So anyways, what I want to do in this week's lecture is to build on
our earlier discussions of treatment effect estimation, and
more formally connect them to this loss based view of machine learning.
And essentially to show how you can turn our discussions
about treatment debate estimation so
far into loss functions that capture these treatment effects.
So then, when you try to train a machine learning method against these loss
functions, they give you treatment effect estimates as a byproduct.
And you get what you want kind of in a follow general machine learning setting.
Before talking about how to design loss functions,
treatment practice donations, and all the nuances that will entail.
I first want to kind of as a warm up and review,
talk briefly about what this last basic view of machine learning looks like.
In some simpler, familiar settings, so
then can see how to extrapolate from there.
Prediction
So again, the simplest machine learning problem, of course, is prediction.
So we have data X's and Y's.
We want to predict Y from X and formally we want to design predictor.
You want to learn a predictor mew hat that takes as input your X's and
outputs predictions for Y.
And given a predictor, what's your loss function?
Well predictor takes as input an X outputs a prediction
you have X and last there is L mu of X comma Y.
It's the prediction error, Y minus mu of X to the 2nd.
Where do we go from here?
Well, for any given, predictor you had,
your training loss is a sum over your n training,
examples of, this square that are loss.
In general to learn new hat, you're going to minimize the square year loss,
with some amount of regularization.
And then, what is the criteria you care about the end?
You, hope that this new hat you learned on the training set, is going to,
when deployed on the test set make predictions, mu have Xi for
unseen examples, Yi will get log squared error loss.
So really what I'm emphasizing here is that kind of,
everything in prediction goes to the squared error loss function.
Once you're given this loss function everything becomes more algorithmic
procedural, your training set, you have a test set, you have a training page of
regularization, but the loss function is there at the center of every task.
Training
So kind of more specifically if you want to train a predictor you're going to
be given a training set.
And on that training set, you're usually going to run an algorithm disk,
this could be the last.
So, it could be boosting, it could be deep neural networks.
These methods are actually learning a predictor, and
algorithmically look pretty different.
But fundamentally all they're trying to do is minimize the training error loss,
the square error loss function you have here using different functional forms and
different types of regularization.
In the hope that, minimize getting a low training loss in terms of square error
on the training set well then generalize into a law test loss on a test set.
So, this loss function is used in training.
If you want to measure the accuracy of your model and kind of predict tested
performance, you can use cross validation, which is essentially just
involves considering this squared error loss out a bolt in your training set.
Or if you wanted to combine different models, and then talk
about stacking later in this lecture, and then you can use stacking as a tool for
model averaging that's also going to be governed by squared error loss.
So again, once you have the square loss function,
everything else is just defined in terms.
So to kind of understand the power of this idea,
let's talk about a different setting where we also might want to do machine
learning but it's not a prediction problem and here one.
News Vendor Model
Nice, problem that's less often talked about, but where everything
works out quite nicely is the following problem in inventory management.
It's called the newsvendor model because you can kind of think of the problem as
motivated by the following story.
You're running a newsstand and you need to choose how many newspapers
queue you're going to purchase before the start of the day.
If you purchase too pune a newspaper you're at risk of stocking out,
which means you'll lose sales because of that.
But if you purchase too many newspapers then you have a high
risk of having newspapers leftover at the end of the day.
And of course, no one wants yesterday's newspapers.
So that's going to be pure waste.
So, you'd want to pick order a quantity of newspaper Q,
that's not too high and not too low.
And then kind of for any specific quantity what's your profit going to be,
well, you need to first purchase your Kuna newspapers you're going
to purchase them at cost C.
So you're going to pay CQ Then what's your revenue going to be well,
the number of newspapers you sell is the minimum of demand and
the number of newspapers you have in stock.
So it can be the minimum of D and Q, where d stands in for demand, and
then you're going to sell them at price P,
your profit is just going to be the difference between these two terms.
That is have a new ad costs, so far, so good.
Now let's say you're kind of a fancy news vendor, and
you recognize that different days are different.
For example, maybe after a major sporting event,
you might expect to sell more newspapers.
And you want to take that into account.
Policy
So, now what you you're going to do is you're also going to measure
some covariate X that help you predict days or
kind of anticipate days when you should purchase more or less newspapers.
And then what you're after is a policy,
is a stocking policy pi of X.
We're kind of on different days depending on the covariance X,
your purchase a different number of newspapers, Q equals pi of X.
So if you were to deploy this policy, what's your expected profit going to be?
Well, it's just going to be the expected profit from above,
except now I'm just going to specifically write Q as Pi of X.
So the value of your policy Pi, say that the expected profit is just going to be P,
the price at which you're selling newspapers times to minimum
of Dn pi of X minus your average cost that is the expectation of seat as policy's.
So, so far, I've just been talking about definitions
that is given a policy, what is your expected profit from
deploying that policy in this newsvendor model?
But now, of course, the question is,
how could you actually come up with a good policy?
And in particular, how can you use data to figure out a good policy time.
And I hope I've kind of suggested the solution strongly enough
that at this point, it shouldn't be a surprise.
Essentially, there's a task you need to choose how many newspapers to purchase.
And there's a reward function V of X, that's your expected profit.
Your loss function is going to be the negative profit and
you'd want to kind of think of this as a machine learning task.
Where you want to use covariates to choose how much to order, such as to
maximize your profit or minimize the loss, the negative of the profit.
And once you adopt this perspective, kind of what to do next is very clear.
For example, if you think about regression trees as trees
that kind of tried to minimize squared error loss.
Well, what would be a tree based algorithm for optimal inventory management.
You could perfectly, well,
emerge in training a tree by recursive partitioning as we usually do,
except now your loss function for training the tree isn't squared error loss.
Your loss function for training a tree is negative
profit and you kind of take it from there.
If you want to read more about this, here are too recent papers that go into that.
But anyways, the point here is that if we want
Machine Learning
to deploy machine learning inventory management,
essentially you need to remember what the newsmen major problem is about.
You need to remember what kind of stocking quantity demand cost price are.
But once you've done so, then you can kind of codify all that subject matter
knowledge into a loss function.
And then when you actually start deploying this you're and
of the part where you do machine learning looks exactly the same as a prediction.
You're trying to kind of using an algorithm, minimize your training
loss over regularize class of functions, say trees, or it could be deep nets also.
And where do we go from here?
Well your tree is going to o try to minimize in sample loss on
the training set you could use this loss function error in here for
cross validation to kind of cut your training set in folds.
And always kind of Some of the folds,
train a tree that kind of prescribed stock in quantities.
And on the held out fold.
You could try to see how well you did,
when you want to kind of see at the very end how well you did.
Well then you'd kind of want to deploy your method on a test set and
assess test set loss or your stocking policy.
But the point I'm making is it's kind of once we found
a loss function that captures what's important about inventory management.
Then the problem of deploying machine learning for
inventory management it's kind of algorithmically verbatim to what we did
before with the only difference is that you swapped in a different loss function.
So, with that background today with this week's
Lecture
lecture is about is loss functions for policy learning.
So there are going to be three parts today.
The first part is going to be, loss functions for treatment.
So specifically I'm going to continue last week's discussion about causal forests.
Which essentially were kind of more of an ad hoc,
forest based algorithm for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects
in a way that was robust in observational studies.
And the goal today is going to be to kind of extract
the key parts of the algorithm that made causal force work, and
then distill those into a loss function.
That you can use with any machine learning method.
So the main difference relative to what I showed you earlier with prediction or
inventory management is that unlike in those cases,
there isn't going to be quite as obvious a loss function.
To use in this context so
we're going to have to work a little bit harder to design a good loss function.
So that's part 1.
Part 2 is going to be on interpreting and validating estimates of
the conditional average treatment effect essentially by now.
We talked a lot about how to estimate cates accurately.
I want to say a little bit more about what you might want to do once
you actually estimated cates and want to see how well did you do?
What have you learned?
So that's part two.
And then, in the last part today, I'm going to talk about policy learning and
by policy learning.
I mean,
the problem of learning decision rules are that try to exploit causal effects.
The problem of learning treatment policies is very closely related to the problem
estimating heterogeneous treatment effects, but it's slightly different.
When we're estimating heterogeneous treatment effects we're trying to give
an American's,
kind of forgiving person we might ask is the treatment effect on one, is it three.
And we try to tune that under kind of squared error loss on the cate scale.
On the other hand, if we're talking about worming treatments and policies,
then our decision is going to be more like a classification decision.
It's going to be a zero or a one, treat, don't treat.
And this is going to lead to some subtle differences so
I'm going to talk about that and talk about the problem of policy learning and
then I'm going to talk about how to design loss functions but that task also.