

Introduction
So far, we've discussed a number of treatment effect estimators and this leads to a natural question.
If you have access to many different treatment estimates, which one should you prefer?
And that's what I want to talk about now. So far we multiple focused on simulations were we knew the right answer a priori.
So comparing methods was easy. But in real world data, we don't know what topics is a priori.
So, we're going to need to come up with some new ideas for evaluating estimators for CATE.
So, some questions I want to focus on here include given two different estimates for CATE, which one is better?
Or even more simply, given one estimate CATE, is it providing any value?
Or is it worse than just predicting zero everywhere?
Data
So, for this purpose, we need to access two datasets. Hopefully data set that mirrors something you might encounter where realistically
you might believe uncle boundedness would hold that is not a randomized trial.
But where you have access to covariance x has been somewhat possible, that treatment would be as good as random once you condition on x.
And for this purpose, I'm going to work based on the California gains study.
So gain or greater avenues for independence is a welfare to work program that is a job training program
that sought to help people get off welfare and rejoin the workforce.
And, here, we're going to work with data from a randomized evaluation of gain that was conducted in the early 90s.
Incidentally, this evaluation was considered a success.
And now gain is deployed in California.
So, anyways, and also first thing to note is that as part of this study,
we have access to 54 covariates including past income,
demographics as so forth, so we have plenty to work with here for this estimation.
But anyways, what makes this dataset particularly interesting for this
purpose is that they didn't actually run one big randomized trial to evaluate gain.
They ran a number of small different randomized trials in different counties.
Here we have data from Alameda, Los Angeles, Riverside and San Diego. And the counties were given quite a bit of freedom in how they ran their experiments.
In particular, they were given freedom about who to enroll in the program.
And they were also given freedom with a fraction of kind of people
experiment to enroll into the treatment versus the control.
And so then what ended up happening is that some counties focused
on enrolling recent welfare enrollees in the program. Whereas other counties focused on more difficult cases people who have been on
welfare for a long time. On the other hand, some counties randomized people to treatment and
control 50 50, whereas others when, as far as 90% of people under treatment and only 10% of people into control.
Okay, we have data from four counties. Each county ran a different type of randomized trial.
How does this relate to what we want? Well, if you take all these four proper randomized trials,
and you blob them into a single batch, and then you forget which county each unit was from,
now you have an observational study. There are a lot of people in the data set.
Everyone in the data set was randomized to either treatment or control. Everyone in the data set was randomized to either treatment or
control with a reasonable probability overlap holds but the probability with which any given unit with randomized treatment or
control varies are essentially based on which county they were from. Now we don't observe the county.
But what we need to hope is that these 54 covariates we got access
to is enough to disentangle any confounding bias introduced by kind of smushing these four different randomized trials.
Together, essentially that uncompounded as holds given these 54 covariance.
So that's the dataset we're going to work with. So just why do I like working with this dataset?
Well, first I think this is actually somewhat representative of asseting where
you might want to use unconfoundedness base methods in practice and someone might also believe the output of the analysis.
If we had been in a situation where there was extreme selection of the treatment,
like, someone tried to evaluate gain but there had actually been no randomization.
You just had two groups of people, one group of people who wanted to enroll and gain and they enrolled and then you'd see outcomes for them.
And then another group of people who did not want to enroll in gain did not then you see outcomes for them.
It's kind of essentially impossible to believe that an uncomfortableness
type analysis could fix this, could give you an estimate of the effect of gain because there's just such a fundamental kind of selection effect.
People who wanted to enroll in game were probably both different in a way that you can't measure, but
that's very important than people who didn't want to enroll in gain and
not accounting for these unobservables which is a huge problem.
On the other hand here, there's no aggressive selection of this type. The reason you have different treatment probabilities for different people,
essentially depends more on where they happen to live
then on kind of some deep unobservable features.
So, it's plausible, that kind of biasing covariates.
You could kind of account for this, where you live effect and be okay.
I'm not saying that this is kind of with a dataset of this type, everyone automatically believe and understand type analysis,
but maybe they'd at least humor it. Another thing is, I think this kind of data set, it's quite easy to end up in.
You tried to run a randomized trial, but then something goes wrong. Maybe under the hood, you had four different studies and your data set but
you just don't know that your data was collected at this kind of way.
And then running unboundedness type analysis can also protect you against that. So anyways, that's one thing I like about this dataset.
The other is that once you've run, your kind of observational study analysis on this, and
you have some claims about how people may or may not respond to treatment,
then if you want to check, if you got the right answer, you can kind of.
Restratify the dataset into the four separate counties, and each of these four counties, you know the three randomization probabilities.
So you can give a very kind of transparent objective,
RCT type assessment of the now claims you came up
with by working with the observational data.
So I'm not going to do this now when evaluating methods for CATE. But in the last segment of this lecture,
we're going to talk about learning treatment center policies. And then I am going to do that, to check that the policy we learned
actually are better than just randomly assigning three. Okay, here's the data set.
We wanted to measure the effect of gain on future labor market outcomes.
So let's do it, between the T-forest, S-forest ,X-forest and causal forest here.
These histograms show out-of-bag estimates of tau hat. And the question is, which ones of these are good, which ones are not?
So here you probably can't see the x and y axes here, but here you can zoom in.
The units here are essentially, they measure earnings in the average
over the nine years post intervention.
I don't remember what the scaling is exactly, but this corresponds to kind of hundreds of dollars of extra earnings
on average per quarter over the nine years post intervention. So these are large treatment effects.
And so what these plots show are histograms of the out-of-bag treatment effects you get from different forest-based methods.
So how are we going to compare these? Guess at this point is not a huge surprise that I'd want to use the R-loss for
this purpose. So so far we've talked about the R-loss as a tool for learning CATE estimates,
but nothing stops you from training a causal forest, which is essentially a random forest version of an R learner.
Training an X forest. These are two separate algorithms that may fail or succeed for a number of reasons.
And then using the R-loss as a tool to assess both. So it seems reasonable, I did that here.
And here's the answer. If you fit a causal forest, your R-loss is 2.39.
If you fit an X-forest, the answer is essentially the same. Same for the T-forest.
S- forest is a lot worse, but all these others are essentially the same. And actually, if you just fit a constant treatment effect to this dataset,
you again get the same answer. So this is a little bit depressing as range, right?
These treatment effect estimates look very different,
and yet these R losses you get from them are almost the same.
Seems odd, what's going on? And to help understand better, it's helpful to expand or
decompose the square term involved in the R-loss. So here Y tilde I'm writing is a centered outcome, that is Y minus M and
W tilde is the centered treatment W minus E. And kind of using the formula a minus b squared is a squared minus 2ab
plus b squared. You can decompose R-loss into three parts.
The average of the Y tilde squared, the inner product between the Y tilde and
the tau hat W tilde term, and then the third term. And what we see is that this first term dominates the loss function.
The R-loss is essentially dominated by this average of Y tilde i squared, okay?
Another thing that's strange is that this term doesn't actually involve tau, okay?
The constant T, S, X, causal forest are all just different choice of tau hat,
so the second and third term are going to be different for all five methods. But this first term is going to be the same for all five methods.
So it's kind of strange having the R-loss be dominated by this term that's actually completely uninformative about tau hat.
I should note, this kind of thing doesn't happen in prediction. Or if it did, essentially the fact that this average of Y tilde
i squared is very large relative to everything else. Means that this kind of pseudo outcome, Y minus m(Xi) is just very,
very noisy relative to this tau hat Wi tilde.
Your best prediction of the pseudo outcome on given X and W.
And if this were a prediction problem, then just kind of having such a noisy outcome relative to predictor would just mean you have a really lousy R squared.
And doesn't mean you have a very poor predictor. But on the other hand, are we worried about the setting of the R-loss?
Turns out not so much, with R-loss you're always going to see things like this. And it's because even though this thing looks a lot like
a prediction loss function, it's different. We've kind of hijacked the form of the prediction squared
R-loss function to target a causal effect. And usually this loss function is going to be very noisy,
not because your CATE estimates are bad, but just because the treatment effect estimation problem is, in a sense, harder.
And this means that kind of the natural loss for treatment effect estimation is going to have more noise.
All right, given that we see this and kind of most of the contribution in the R-loss comes from this term that's uninformative about tau, which we do.
The idea is just look at differences of R-losses. If you take two R-losses for two different tau estimates,
this thing here is going to cancel out because it's the same for both.
And then you're left with kind of these two terms, which are kind of scale that capture what's going on with tau hat.
So what we're going to do here specifically, so we're going to be interested in the R-loss of our tau hat of interest versus
R-loss of some baseline CATE estimate. And here for this purpose,
we're going to use a constant treatment effect estimate as our baseline.
So now this difference is no longer asking what's the R-loss of some choice of tau hat.
But rather what's the difference between the R-loss
of one choice of tau hat versus just kind of predicting a constant
treatment of everywhere and ignoring any heterogeneity.
Comparison
And if you do this, you get something much more manageable.
Essentially, what happens here is that the T-forest and S-forest have positive values of delta.
So what this method tells you is that kind of they're just doing very badly here.
In terms of R-loss, they're doing worse than just predicting a constant everywhere.
Whereas both the X-forest and the causal forest here have negative deltas, which
means that they're actually improving over a constant treatment effect estimate.
And that they are actually I did finding useful treatment heterogeneity here.
Another thing is if you look at the t-statistics for these findings from the X and color forest they're significant.
At the 95% level they're bigger than a 1.96 in absolute value,
so Gaussian P-value gives you Is below 0.05. And what this means is again, this is more validation that both of these
methods are improving over saying that there's no heterogeneity. Here the X-forest gives you actually a smaller delta than causal forest.
So the claim here is that the X-forest is finding more heterogeneity, then causal force according to our loss.
But the difference between these two numbers is not significant at the 95%.
Anyways, so this is the first thing you can do to compare different
treatment effect estimators it's to use the R-loss.
I just wanted to emphasize if you look at the raw number of the R-loss is going to be kind of disturbing maybe because you're going to get a very large absolute
number for the loss. That's going to be roughly the same for any method you compare,
which is going to suggest that nothing matters. But taking differences you can cancel out this kind of uninteresting
term that kind of made all the loss functions look big. And then you can see meaningful differences between methods, so
Other Methods
this is one thing you can do. Are there other methods for assessing CATE?
Of course, and there's a large and growing number. One thing to emphasize, though, is that very often
the reason you want to do fit a CATE estimate was for a certain purpose.
And then the best methods for evaluating CATE will essentially the measures of digital health estimates
enable you to accomplish the purpose of you want it to. It's almost impossible to talk about all methods for evaluating estimates for
treatment heterogeneity entirely in the abstract without
being connected to kind of the application you want to address.
But here I'm just going to very briefly kind of survey a handful of ideas that have been useful in the past.
And if you end up using estimates of heterogeneity in your own research,
you may be able to adapt in ways that are useful.
So a first kind of very simple thing you might want
to think about is just a reason you want to do estimate path.
Is to generally see are some people more responsive to treatment than the others and how much heterogeneity is there?
And so then one very natural way to capture this is to just look at, okay?
There are some people in your study who you predicted to have higher than average treatment effects.
And some people in your study we predicted to have lower average treatment effects. Now on held out data, if I actually asked you to estimate the average treatment
effect for the people whose Tau are below average. Versus the average treatment effect for
people whose Tau has four above average, did you find any difference.
If imagine I have a training set and my training set is going to cause rust on the test set, I go and
divide people into who had low versus high predicted Tau hats. And then I compute average treatment effects on those two halves and
there's no difference. It kind of really puts into question whether the causal forestland.
Hear on the other hand, you can run this kind of exercise and you get a fairly different average treatment effect estimates in and
the high versus low groups, so that's somewhat encouraging.
For more about this kind of exercise, you can see this kind of application paper.
Another way to kind of run a sanity check, so the way I think about this grouping into high versus low.
Calibration Check
And then looking at average treatment effects in the high versus low group,
it's a pretty low bar to pass for treatment effects estimator.
Usually, if you get a really good Tau estimator, you're going to want to do something more sophisticated with it than just divide people into high and
low group and call it today. But it's a very good kind of first sanity check.
If you're CATE estimator isn't able to reliably group people and to high versus the low group with different average treatment effects.
You might have be suspicious about its ability to do much anything else.
So this calibration check, unlike what next falls in the same category,
it's again not asking a huge amount. But if it doesn't pass this, this check, you may again be worried.
So here what we're going to do is kind of this train of thought experiment, again, you can think in there's a training set on a test set.
So first, on my training set, I'm going to go learn Tau hats, now I'm going to go to my test set and on my test set,
I'm going to fit a strange linear model. I'm going to run fit a linear model for the treatment effect,
what I'm going to ask you the treatment effect is essentially of the form alpha plus beta times Tau hat of xi.
That is on my test set with a linear model for the CATE with a single feature, which is essentially my predicted CATE from the training set.
So concretely, the way we're going to do it. The model we're going to fit like this is we're first going to have
this kind of your CATE on the test set should be kind of alpha times a measure of the average street.
The average of the Tau hats saved from before, plus beta times the deviation of Tau hats from Tau bar.
So we're going to run this regression and then we're going to get estimates for both.
This is alpha and this here is beta and essentially, okay, if alpha and
beta were exactly one, then what would this say?
All right, if alpha and beta were one, then that would mean your prediction of the CATE on the test set is just Tau hat of Xi.
That is, this regression actually liked the Tau hats you learned on the training set, and just wanting to preserve them on the test set.
Now on the other hand, if alpha and beta are very far from one,this
suggests that something fishy is going on, so in this setting
This mean prediction, this asks kind of how good was the average
of how bars evolved the trading systems and estimates for that average CATE.
On a test set this is close to 1, which means we've been very suggestful doing very well on the average effect.
On the other hand this differential prediction is kind of saying
if tau hat exceeds the average prediction by some amount on the training set,
how do you want to interpret this on test set? And here we actually get a coefficient of 1.3 which actually suggests that causal
force here was underfitting a little bit. So this recalibration is stretching out the predictions.
And I'm saying that kind of a high, if the tau had predictions
you got now we're like low versus high, then it actually prefer
on a test set to make predictions that were spread apart by a factor of 1.3.
Which suggests that maybe actually the causal force was slightly underfitting on the training set, okay, here we get 1.3.
This for calibration exercise in my book is actually pretty good.
What are the things that could happen that are very bad? Essentially where I get very worried is this number here,
the estimate, the coefficient on kind of how should you adjust the spread of your CATE estimates on a test set.
If this thing isn't significantly different from zero or if it's even negative.
If this were negative it'd be pretty embarrassing. It'd be saying like based on the training set if you think one observation should
have a high CATE I think action tests should probably have a low CATE and vice versa.
So you can think about this P value here as just an overall hypothesis test for
did your method find any useful heterogeneity at all. And if this P value is not significant, this means that kind of when you're
trying to reinterpret your tau hats on a test set. Then it's not even clear to you that you want to use these predictors at all,
or maybe on the tests that you'd prefer just estimating the treatment effects overall as constant.
So, this is the calibration check. One thing I should note as we implement this in GRF.
Here I talked about everything in terms of training set and test set, but in GRF we implement this using out of bag predictions.
So, kind of this tau head of Xi would be your out of bag treatment effect estimate.
And then we run the regression kind of. But we run a regression where we kind of for each data point, or
the predictor is kind of Xi that is the CATE estimate fitted from everyone but u.
Genie Curve
One final idea I wanted to mention is this thing called the QINI curve,
which interestingly has recently become very popular in the marketing literature.
And the QINI curve is essentially built on all this idea that in some settings, the reason you're interested in estimating heterogeneous treatment effects is
that you have some intervention, that's probably going to be beneficial for everyone.
But you think some people might benefit from it more than others and
you kind of want to use your CATE estimates to rank people in terms of how much they're likely to benefit from the treatment.
And then you're going to kind of assign people to treatment in order of the rank.
So here, the output of this analysis typically is this QINI plot.
And on the x-axis, you're going to have the fraction of people created from 0 to 1. And on the y-axis, you're going to have this number that measures essentially.
Let's say here we're at 0.2. So this would be saying if I treat the top 20% of
people with the highest estimated CATE, then what's my estimate of the average treatment effect or not that,
the total effect the total value of treating these 20% of the people.
So, kind of very concretely and I think this is why it's easy to imagine why or
understand why people in marketing like this. If kind of you're sending out flyers and the cost of sending out
a flyer is one cent, then you can think about this axis kind of directly measures the cost of the number of flyers you sent.
And this curve could be like, if on the y-axis, the treatment effect is kind of how many people that you get to join your service.
Then you could say, okay by sending out 200 flyers or 200,000 flyers, I can get 3000 people to join my service.
And by sending out 400,000 flyers, I can get 5000 people to join my service, something like that.
And then this curve kind of captures very directly this cost benefit analysis.
So again, on the x-axis, you have the cost and on the y-axis you have an estimate of the cumulative
gain from treating that fraction of people.
So again in implementing the QINI curve, there are a number of subtleties and
a number of choices to make, one overall reference that kind of presents this pretty nicely as is by Imai & Li.
And actually, this plot it's from a paper I was working on recently, this one.
Where we considered a setting were actually kind of the cost of intervening, not only does it benefit from intervening on different units to change but
actually the costs are different there's kind of one unit intervening on the cheap.
Whereas another unit intervening on them might be very expensive and we talked about methods for that problem.
But again, kind of once the dust settles and you want to see how well you did.
This kind of QINI curve objects again very useful. You rank people in order you want to prioritize them for treatment.
On the x-axis you kind of plot the cumulative cost. How much you need to spend to treat that many people and
on the y- axis you plot cumulative gain. And overall the plot retains its interpretation as a cost benefit analysis.
