

Introduction
Hi, everyone, welcome to week 2 of machine learning and causal inference.
Just to get everyone up to speed, last week, right?
You had a crash course on machine learning, just a reminder of what are some
of the widely used methods in machine learning, what people are doing out there.
I imagine that for most of you, that is a review, it's mostly a review.
Now, is when we get into really the core of this class, that is how you can use and
deploy a machine learning based methods in causal analyses.
This week, we're going to focus more of a classical topic in causal inference,
estimating average treatment effects,
I'll say more in just a few slides about what that means.
And how we can rigorously deploy off-the-shelf type
machine learning tools for this task.
In the upcoming weeks, we're going to dig deeper and
look at some more specialized tasks, including creating personalization.
And look at how we can kind of develop special purpose
machine learning methods for those tasks.
Machine Learning
So anyways, before saying anything else, just of course, the core tension
of this class, and one that both Susan and I have already emphasized many times,
but it doesn't hurt to say once more is right, what's machine learning about?
Machine learning methods are about prediction, they're about giving
a type of data, understanding what usually happens in a given situation.
For example, you could download historical weather data, and
then based on that data, try to understand.
Given the conditions you expect there to be tomorrow,
what's the chance that air pollution levels will be dangerously high?
That's prediction, but that's not usually what we care about
in many economic or social science applications,
in many applications like this, we care about causal questions.
We don't just care about understanding what would usually happen in a given type
of situation, we want to understand counter factuals, we want to understand,
say, what would happen.
Not only do we think tomorrow might have high pollution levels, but
can we change this by, say, reducing the number of cars on the road.
We're most interested in interventions we might take to kind of
improve the situation.
So this is obviously a different kind of question, and
as we'll see many times in the class.
A naive application of machine learning methods that are designed for
prediction to cause a task, can get one into quite a bit of trouble.
But that's also see if done right, then actually, machine learning
methods can be usefully adapted to causal tasks, many can be very helpful.
Outline
So anyways, having said that,
this week our goal is to understand how machine
learning methods can be rigorously deployed for
the classical task of average treatment effect estimation.
And with this, they are the main result,
we're going to give it in the fourth part of this lecture.
The main result is going to be a methodology based on doubly robust
estimation that can kind of take as inputs, generic, black box type
machine learning estimates, and as output gives you confidence intervals.
What kind of eliminating normal sampling distribution,
and all the guarantees you'd like.
But okay, we need to work up to it, and so
this will be done in kind of four videos.
The first video in this one,
I'll introduce the notion of average treatment effect.
Talk about some basics about how we can think about average treatment effects in
the context of randomized trials.
Then, in part 2, I'm going to talk about kind of some simple
ways you could think about using machine learning for
average treatment effect estimation.
Compare that to kind of classical regression based methods and
see what's good, what's bad, what the limitations are.
This spoiler give this is not really a spoiler alert,
the naive method won't quite work.
You'll leave something on the table,
you won't get the confidence intervals of the type you'd want at night method.
So we need to do something else, and here we're going to start working towards it.
Part 3 may feel like an aside at the time,
I'm going to introduce propensity score methods, and
kind of an estimation toolkit are built around that, but
by the time we get to part 4, you'll see that this was not an aside.
The kind of state of the art way of incorporating
machine learning methods into the average treatment effect estimation world.
Kind of combines the naive approach with insights from propensity score based
methods, that's going to take us to what's called the doubly robust methods.
And out of all the methods, I'm going to talk about today,
that's the one I recommend you to practice, and
that's one I also use often in my own research.
All right, so that's the outline, and now we're in part 1,
so what's the average treatment effect?
Definition
Here's the definition.
I should emphasize again, like we mentioned in the intro video,
when it comes to defining core notions from causal inference,
we're going to move quite fast in this class.
So if you want more background on these notions,
it may make sense to say read some kind of introductory econometrics resources,
including some of the ones we've listed ourselves.
Okay, for all of today,
I'm going to work in terms of this classical statistical setup.
We have n units, an independently sampled units.
And for each unit, we observe a feature vector,
that's kind of background information about who you are.
Our response Y, that's the outcome, the thing we usually want to
improve using a treatment, and then a binary treatment at 0 or 1.
0 if you didn't get treated or if you got assigned control, and
1 if you got treated.
So this is standard COBOL setup, and then in order to
talk about causality, what I'm going to do here is I'm
going to posit the existence of these quantities Yi0,
Yi1, these are called potential outcomes.
And the way to interpret these quantities is that,
Yi(0) measures the outcome you would have observed for
the i-th unit had they received control, and Yi(1) is the outcome you
would have observed for the i-th unit had they received treatment.
Then of course, the outcome you actually observe of Yi is the potential
outcome corresponding to the value Wi of the treatment that you actually received.
Why are potential outcomes useful?
It's because they enable you to kind of very directly define a causal effect.
The causal effect of the treatment is the difference in potential outcomes.
It's for the i-th unit, the effective treatment is just the difference between
what would have happened to the i-th unit with the treatment verses without.
So this is the treatment effect for the i-th unit.
And a lot of causal inference is going to be trying to say
something about these differences in potential outcomes.
Now, today we're going to kind of focus on one specific question you can ask in
terms of these potential outcomes.
Average Treatment Effect
And that is, what is the average treatment effect, or
what is the average difference in potential outcomes if the causal
effect of the treatment on the i-th unit was Yi(1)- Yi(0)?
Then here the thing we're going to have,
the average treatment effect is the average across the sampling
distribution of these individual treatment effects.
And the average treatment effect is, not surprisingly,
it's often considered kind of a first very helpful summary
measure of the effectiveness of a treatment in some population.
So why is this problem not completely trivial?
Well, taking averages is not that hard, we know how to do that.
And here the difficulty, of course, is that you have a missing data problem.
For each unit, the treatment effect for the individual treatment effect of
the i-th unit Yi(1)- Yi(0) is defined as the outcome you would have gotten if
you were treated minus the outcome you would have gotten if you weren't.
That's the difference of two things.
But of course, you only ever get to observe one of these two things.
Either you're treated, in which case you observe the treatment potential outcome,
or you're control, in which case you observe the control potential outcome, but
you never get to observe both.
So you have this fundamental missingness issue,
that's what makes this problem not trivial.
On other hand, to be interesting, it also needs to be possible.
And it turns out that kind of given the right methods,
estimating average treatment effects is practical.
So where I want to work towards, like I said earlier this week,
is getting to a point where we have kind of more complicated types of data.
And we can kind of bring machine learning tools to the table to kind of
enable flexible and
robust estimation of average treatment effects in quite a bit of generality.
But just as a warm up, let's talk about the simplest case in which
you can estimate an average treatment effect and how that works out.
And of course, the simplest case between causal inference is the randomized trial.
We say that you're in a randomized trial if the treatment assignment is randomized.
That is, there are some people who get treated,
some people will get the control assignment.
And it's really, who gets treated or control is chosen completely at random.
There's kind of no association between the potential outcomes of a unit and
the treatment.
Qualitatively, you could think that it's a randomized trial if for
every person, you flipped a coin.
If the coin came out heads, you assign them to treatment.
Otherwise, you assign them to control.
And, okay, why do we like randomized trials?
Well, here is kind of a very short derivation which shows that essentially,
the average treatment effect, that is, the average difference
between the kind of treated potential outcome and the control potential outcome.
This thing here can be expressed as in this other way.
That is, the expected value of the outcome for
the treated units minus the expected value of the outcome for the controls.
And of course, this thing here is easy to estimate.
You could just kind of literally end a randomized trial,
take the average of the Y's for the treatment units and this for the controls.
So this kind of immediately suggests an estimator that you could use for
the average treatment effect.
And of course, the important difference here is that here,
we define expectations in terms of potential outcomes.
Potential outcomes are not always observed, so we have missing data problem.
Down here we have a conditional expectation.
But in terms of Yi's, that is, kind of actual observables,
there's no problem in estimating the average of Y conditional on W=1.
So this we can just read out from the data and there's no problem.
And really, the key step in this derivation here was this first line,
where we argued that the average of the treated potential
outcome over the whole sample is the same as average
of the treated potential outcome conditional on Wi=1.
And this follows from this randomization statement.
Because treatment is randomized, conditioning on treatment
doesn't change the expectation, so this is safe.
Then in the second line here,
we went from the expectation of the treated potential outcome conditional on
being treated to just the expectation of the outcome being treated.
This is kind of more mechanistic, kind of we already agreed that when you're
treated, the thing you observe is the treated potential outcome.
So this is kind of a more tautological consequence of the definition we've
set up.
But, so what does this mean?
It means that even though there's this fundamental missingness problem in causal
inference, you have treated and control potential outcomes.
Causal effects are defined in terms of differences of things you can
only ever observe one of, then it's actually possible to estimate
an average treatment effect using a randomized trial.
That is, a dataset where our treatment
was generated uniformly at random.
Example
All right, so just to kind of illustrate this in terms of kind of a simple example.
Suppose again that we wanted to understand the effect of
Driving restrictions on air quality.
So, what I'm showing in this slide is essentially Oracle data,
that kind of an omniscient statistician could hope to have.
Everyday you have Yi(0), the pollution levels you
would have gotten that day if there were no restrictions on traffic.
Yi(1), another potential outcome,
that is the pollution levels you would have gotten with the traffic reduction.
And then this tau Y,
that is the effect of the traffic reductions on pollution that day.
Here I made a plot of the potential outcomes Yi(0) and Yi(1).
You see that there's very strong correlation between Yi(0) and Yi(1).
That is most days, pollution was what it was going to be.
And kind of the traffic restrictions only had a kind of second order effect.
But at the same time you also see that Yi(1) is typically smaller than Yi(0).
The data kind of lives below the diagonal.
And this means that the traffic reductions did help or
the restrictions did help reduce pollution a little bit.
And if you take the averages of all these, then what that says is the average
treatment effect, that is the average daily effect of the traffic
restrictions is here, -10 and it's connected to the road.
If we had access to this full table getting this -10,
Chris averaging this tau i's would be very easy.
But of course, this isn't what real data looks like in real data.
Real Data
Even if you had the kind of best data you could hope for.
You have a randomised trial.
Then every day you flip a coin, and depending on how that coin comes out,
you either observe Yi(0) the control potential outcome, or
you observe Yi(1) treated potential outcome.
You don't get to observe both.
And so in particular, your problem is that you never observed tau i's.
So you might be wondering how can I estimate the average of the tau i's,
if I never get to observe a single tau i.
But this is kind of the theory we just saw earlier,
you get an unbiased estimate of tau i by taking
the average of outcomes on days where you got treated.
Minus the average of the outcome on days where you got a control,
and then this gives you an average treatment effect estimate of minus 10.
All right, this is how it works.
Randomized trials are very nice.
Not much need for kind of, you can do most things you want in randomized trials.
At least in terms of estimating average treatment effects without
using any very sophisticated methods.
But okay, we're not always in randomized trials and
then we need to work harder.
And we're essentially a very kind of simple example,
where this kind of discussion from the couple last slides wouldn't apply,
is if the treated assignment is in random but
it's actually associated with confounders.
So let's just consider a very simple example.
You want to understand the effect of some treatment that helps mitigate and
prevent obesity on quality adjusted life years.
But you didn't assign this treatment in a randomized trials rather you just have
data from electronic medical records with decisions made by doctors, as they saw it.
And here you might assume that look,
doctors aren't going to assign the treatment kind of uniformly at random.
They're going to prioritize this treatment to
people who have higher weight coming in.
And if this is what's going on,
then just stating a difference in means can fail to
give you a valid notion of an average treatment effect.
So, let's consider an extreme example.
Let's suppose the treatment does nothing.
So for every unit, the treated and
potential control potential outcomes are just the same.
But here you see kind of people vary by weight,
they vary by outcome, there's your negative association.
And what is it the only effect that's going on here is
essentially that doctors are more likely to assign treatment
to people with higher weight than with lower weight.
And what's going to happen here?
Well, you're going to have some treated units that live
in the higher weight region.
Controls live here.
In the lower back region, so the treatment does nothing.
But if we start looking at a difference in means type estimator,
we look at the average outcome for treated units versus controls.
What are we going to get?
Well, the average outcome for
the control units here is higher than for the treated units.
This is just a function of doctors choosing to treat different people all
based on weight and there being negative association between outcomes and weight.
And when you put these two things together,
you see that actually the average outcome for
treated units is going to be lower than the average outcome for the control units.
So, if you just kind of naively study this is a randomized trial,
you think that the treatment here was harmful.
Whereas actually, it does nothing.
You just had a selection bias issue and you kind of detecting that bias.
So this is the end of the first part.
In the second part, we're going to start talking about conceptual and
statistical solutions for
estimating average treatment effects when you're not in a randomized trial.
