ntro
The next thing I want to talk about is the propensity score and
propensity based methods for average treatment effect estimation.
There are many reasons for doing this.
The first is essentially that the propensity score is one of the most
important objects in observational studies and causal inference.
So when a class like basically we're bound to talk about it at some point and
now is as good a time as end.
The second is that propensity score based methods are for
average treatment effect estimation.
Have an interesting connection to machine learning.
And there's actually been a lot of recent discussion around the relevance of
kind of a machine learning based approach to propensity based methods.
So, I'm going to talk about that and it's going to give an interesting complement to
what we just saw in the case of machine learning based progression adjustments.
The last is that propensity score based ideas.
Ideas we see here are going to play a key role in enabling the kind
of central best practice methods for
average treatment effect destination based on machine learning.
So we kind of need it as a preliminary for that.
But anyways, what is the propensity score?
What is the propensity score
It has a simple definition.
The propensity score is conditionally on covariance x,
the probability of receiving treatment.
In a randomized trial,
you might remember that treatment is assigned uniformly at random,
ignoring kind of anything about the person being treated or not.
And a way of saying this in terms of propensity score is that in
a randomized trial, the propensity score is constant.
Say in uniform a 50/50 randomized trial,
you flip a fair coin to determine if someone gets treated or not.
So in a trial like that the propensity score would just be uniformly .5.
What this also kind of suggests is that at least qualitatively,
if a randomized trial is a setup where you have constant propensity scores.
Then maybe if you look at the propensity score and
plot the credit spread of the propensity score that gives you some
notion of how far given an observational study is from being randomized.
So anyways, what's interesting about the propensity score,
Inverse propensity weighted transformation
and the key fact here really is that under unconfoundedness
that is the same condition we saw in part two.
The average treatment effect can be characterized via you could
call the inverse-propensity weighted transformation.
So here what's true is tau remember it's the average treatment effect.
Kind of predefined it for you, just in case rather than over the past 10 minutes.
The average treatment effect, you can rewrite
it as the expectation of WY divided by e minus the other term and
this is another representation for
the average treatment effect.
And again what's interesting about this is that here when we originally defined
the average treatment effect it defined in terms of potential outcomes.
Now, Yi(1),Yi(0) in general you don't see potential
outcomes in nature, you observe the actual outcome Yi.
So Y is this representation helpful.
Well here kind of this representation in terms of inverse-propensity weighting
doesn't depend on potential outcomes.
It only depends on actual outcomes.
So this is something you can measure whereas this is something that kind of you
can't directly measure you need to represent it, before measuring it.
And so then given this representation what this immediately suggests
is a practical estimator for the average treatment effect.
It's the inverse-propensity weighted estimator.
Takes on the following form.
And kind of this unbiasness result here immediately tells you that
the inverse-propensity weighted estimator is unbiased for
the average treatment effect.
Ideas of this type are very common.
Many areas of statistics you might have encountered similar idea in different
areas under a name like importance weighting or Horvitz-Thompson sampling.
These are kind of all different instantiations of the same idea.
Why is inverse-propensity weighting unbiased?
The short story is something like this.
Remember the treatment assignment here in binary, it's either 1 or 0.
When w is 1, then you're always treated, so
you only get to observe the y's here when w equals 1.
Which means that you can essentially replace this y here by
the treated potential outcome yi1.
Same thing in the second term, you only get to see that second term or
when w is 0 when your control condition.
So you kind of could equivalently just think that here you only see that
control potential outcomes.
And what about this ratio?
The remaining terms, the W/e and the1-W/1-e.
Well, just remember, W is the, whether you actually got treated or not.
e is the probability of getting treated.
So these ratios are one an expectation.
So the hope is that kind of, since these ratios are one expectation,
they cancel out an expectation.
And that's how you get unbiasness.
The formal argument, we're taking out that this works relies on unconfoundedness and
I can spell it out more specific calculation here.
The nice thing about a synchronous format is that if you want to think about this
more now is a great time to pause the video and go through this line by line.
And the ideas are similar to the ones seen earlier.
And otherwise I'm just going to keep going here.
Remember all of this relies on unconfoundedness.
If you don't want to think unconfoundness then of course you need to do something
else to identify that restricted.
Oracle IPW estimator
All right, so what we have so far.
Here's a result, that here's this kind of nice estimator to tau IPW.
It's unbiased for the average treatment effect.
One thing to emphasize is that here when defining this estimator,
I use the true propensity scores.
That is I actually knew I had access to the probability of being treated
conditionally on x for all my units, so I could actually form this score.
I'll talk about this as the oracle estimator because of course, sometimes you
don't know you have x and then you can do this and I'll put a star up here.
To remind us that in order to construct this, Estimator you
needed to kind of have more information about the sampling distribution.
All right, if Oracle IPW is unbiased then,
what can we do if we don't know the propensity score.
Well, one very natural idea here is to first kind of estimate e hat.
You can first estimate e hat.
And then kind of once you've estimated that e hat.
You can plug these e hats into the denominator here.
So kind of this is not sparred.
This is a, this is a feasible estimator.
So we're going to kind of first estimate e hat.
This is just a prediction task, right, you're trying to predict w from x,
you could throw your favorite machine learning methods at it,
boosting random forest, deep nets anything else.
And then kind of once you've estimate the propensity score You could kind of try
running through the IPW framework, kind of as though you knew the propensity score.
And this is actually if you look at kind of the timeline of machine learning and
causal inference.
This is actually kind of one of the first things people wanted to do.
They had this idea that look, if we're running IPW, we want propensity scores,
we could get propensity score estimates out of machine learning, and
just kind of from there proceed.
The question of course, is this any good?
We know that the Oracle IPW estimator with a true propensity score is good.
Is the feasible I pw estimator with estimate propensity scores good
Now we're getting into some slightly subtle territory.
I won't give a kind of comprehensive study of IPW with estimated
propensity scores here, that would be beyond the scope of this class.
But what I all do here in terms of trying to see if this is good or not,
I'm going to try one line of attack that you might hope would work.
Show that it doesn't go through, give up.
I won't kind of study down with IBEW further than that.
And then what's going to happen is as the same line of attack when applied to double
robust methods, as we'll talk about in the last part of this lecture,
then this line of attack is going to work.
So what's the idea?
The idea is essentially that this tau hat star IBEW, the Oracle IPW estimator,
if this is good, then what you might hope is that kind of estimating
the propensity scores and then plugging them into here.
But essentially and wouldn't matter too much, if you have decent
kind of realistically accurate, e hats out of a machine learning method.
Then if you run this kind of feasible IPW estimator it would behave
like the Oracle, then you could study the Oracle in detail.
And if these two things are similar enough, then the kind
of same study would also imply some good results about the feasible time IBEW.
And if this line of argument worked, we'd be in great shape, okay.
Spoiler again, I've already given a spoiler.
This doesn't go through but kind of To see why it doesn't go through.
Let's look at this in level.
So this argument has to have two parts, right?
First we need to have an understanding of what does Oracle IPW do what would
be the kind of ideal properties we'd want this feasible IP w estimator to satisfy.
Then we need to study the gap between the feasible in the Oracle IPW estimator and
kind of argue that this gap is small relative to our stochastic
fluctuations in the original estimator.
So, let's start by looking at this Oracle IPW estimator.
So this one here With what we
should see right is that remember we've assumed that kind of data points x,
y w are drawn it from a distribution and also here that this means
that if the you know the propensity score function e of x a priori,
then actually this thing in orange, it's just an average of n,i,e things.
Each of which is unbiased for the thing you want to estimate that is tau.
So, now we know averages of IOT things well, right.
They're going to satisfy under very general conditions a central limit
theorem.
They're going to converge at a root and right.
And so kind of once we've noticed that Oracle IPW is just an ID average,
then we're going to get a central limit theorem immediately.
And this kind of central limit theorem is with justifies kind of all
the standard constructions for building confidence intervals for
the average treatment effect, and so forth.
So here just to emphasize I'm going quickly.
I'm assuming that everyone here either has taken kind of a first
class in econometrics or a class in statistics,
statistics theory, maybe on the level of stats 200.
So I'm assuming that they should all be very familiar to you once you see
an average you understand that the average is given under general conditions
satisfy the central limit theorem.
And once I tell you the central limit theorem, the second order display,
you'll kind of know how to turn this into a statement about
confidence intervals and how to build confidence intervals.
If this isn't true, I encourage you to kind of go to office hours.
Go through what's going on with the TA and
also kind of reach out with some more reading materials here.
But anyways, so this is the Oracle estimator,
the thing that converges at a one over rudin rate.
We'd want hope is for the feasible estimator with estimated propensity scores
to also satisfy this kind of behaviour and to also convert at a wonderful rate.
And what will this look like?
It would look like essentially this feasible estimator here.
We'd want this to kind of look like the Oracle estimator.
Which we're here is a perfectly fine estimator plus an error term, the error
due to kind of using e hat instead of e as the propensity score metric here.
And for this argument to go through,
we'd essentially want this difference between feasible and
Oracle IPW to be smaller than one over root n to kind of be
dominated by stochastic fluctuations in valid IPW,
because this would then mean that you can ignore these errors
when studying this estimator here, so, all right.
If we wanted to ignore the contributions of propensity score estimation in IPW,
we'd want this error to be much smaller than one over root.
And is it now we need to kind of try something, try an upper bound.
Upper bound
Here I tried an upper bound using the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
So first remember we want to bound this difference,
tau hat IPW minus the Oracle tau hat star IPW.
So here I just wrote it down.
What you should notice is that here you're dividing by estimated propensity scores
here you're dividing true propensity scores.
The only kind of difference in how I wrote this down is how i took the outcomes,
here that had been kind of everywhere and I just put the outcomes on the right.
Then given this, we can apply the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
It's going to give us this here, you see two terms here,versus
talk about the shorter one, the square root of the average of the Y squared.
This is something that kind of as you collect more data,
it's not going to get big or small.
It's just going to be on the order of one.
This is going to converge to kind of the square root of expectation of y squared.
So that's fine.
The more interesting term here is the first one.
This is the one that kind of would be 0 if you kind of use the true
propensity scores that is kind of E half where exactly E.
How far is this from 0?
Well just you can go through arguments in detail if you want.
Essentially, the nicest thing you could assume is that the propensity
score chords are all bounded away from zero and one.
So then you can apply some kind of Taylor expansion once you do this,
you land on your feet and
you find that this difference is essentially going to be on the order up to
constants out the root mean squared error of the propensity score.
So anyways, this is one derivation.
You could try other derivations here.
I'm not going to do that, but kind of at least with the Koshi Schwarz approach,
which to what do we get?
Well, essentially we found that we have an upper bound for
the discrepancy between town head IPW and tau at star IPW.
That is the kind of a bound for
the effect of using estimated propensity scores and IPW.
And this bound depends on the root mean squared
error of the estimated propensity score.
Is this good enough?
Well, the answer is going to be, no why?
As you remember, we wanted in order for these errors not to matter,
we need the discrepancy between feasible and
Oracle IPW to be much smaller than one over root.
Is this realistic to get out of a machine learning method If you've
studied statistical learning, you'd immediately see that no.
If you haven't, then you'll have to just have taken on faith here.
But essentially what's realistic to expect in terms of root mean squared error.
Well, if you're in a parametric problem have a very easy problem where if
someone say a linear model is with both specified and you just need to fit
the parameters of that linear model, then what you can hope to get in terms of
root mean squared error is a rate of convergence of one over square root of n.
Now, the problems where we apply machine learning are generally more
complicated non parent problems.
Were getting parametric rates of convergence is too optimistic.
And we should generally expect to have root mean squared error that's much
bigger than the parametric rate of one number Ruda.
In thinking of this, you should kind of also think back to our attempts at using
random forests for regression adjustments in the previous part Where we saw
that kind of random forests will often eventually get you the right answer.
But kind of the cost of being very flexible and nonparametric
means that at any specific problem, you might converge slower.
So, actually in general when you're using a machine learning method,
you should always assume that your root mean squared error is going to be much
bigger than one over root n.
Whereas here we order for this balance and give us what we want, we would have
needed the reasoning squared error to be much smaller than one over root n.
And that essentially never happens with with a machine learning method,
so, okay, this argument doesn't go through Of course,
there are some loose ends here.
I've essentially just computed an upper bound and
set the upper bound with skogen up.
But it turns out this isn't the problem this upper bound is perfectly fine.
The problem was just that kind of a more careful study would show that just
the problem is that Tao had IPW star IPW aren't particularly close in general,
when you estimate propensity scores by a general machine learning method.
And that what's going to happen is that in IP W,
if you use a machine learning method to estimate propensity
scores the error due to plugging in estimated propensity scores.
Is going to swamp the sampling error you could have gotten by using Oracle IP.
So even though kind of IP w with two propensity scores is a good method,
if you plug in machine learning based estimates of the propensity scores,
you're generally going to end up in trouble.
Conclusion
And so, again, kind of just to restate the main problem here is that,
generally when using machine learning methods, with one kind of
machine learning methods is kind of robust, flexible estimation guarantees.
What we want is that kind of without having to model the problem specifically
are under very general conditions can hope to get consistency in large samples.
But just because machine learning gives you kind
of the right answer in very large samples doesn't mean that,
in finite samples, you can ignore it's estimation, right?
Machine learning really at a high level,
gives you predictions that are always pretty good but never great.
And under find that in finite samples, you almost always have non negligible errors.
When you're running PW when you using a regression
adjustment as we saw in the previous part,
when you're running kind of machine learning based methods and
difference in using he had versus E and IPW, or in many other analogous settings.
The error from using the kind of error from
using machine learning here is not negligible.
And if you don't take it into account,
you just can be very wrong about the accuracy of your estimator and so forth.
So generally we cannot ignore this estimation error and
the bias that comes from it and a naive approach that does so
well generally results in confidence intervals and
other inferential statements that are just laid off.
And again, why is this the case?
Well, with IPW we just saw a very concrete example.
The standard approach for building confidence intervals in Oracle IPW
will give you confidence intervals that are of length one over root n.
But now If you use a machine learning based method to estimate propensity
scores, you're going to introduce an additional error term that's way
bigger that's bigger than one over root n.
So once you have error terms that are larger than the confidence
intervals you built originally, this makes the original
confidence intervals, okay, that's what we're at now.
What I hope I've gotten across so far is that even though machine
learning methods can be used to estimate a variety of functions
under considerable flexibility you need to be very careful.
And if you're not careful, then kind of the kind of error that you
incur from plugging in machine learning based predictions into
your estimation pipeline is just going to be prohibitively large.
What can we do about it?
At this point, you might think the situation is hopeless.
We should just throw out machine learning based methods and go back to parametric
modeling since then, at least when the parametric models were specified.
We know what to do but it turns out that even though naive tablet case
machine learning method don't work out here.
There are things that do And the solution is delightful example
You can do exactly the kind of thing we've been doing so far.
That is take a simple estimator, plug in machine learning based predictions in and
then attempt to ignore the error of the machine learning based method.
He only thing is that you need to be careful about the estimator,
you plug these machine learning based predictions in.
And regression adjustments alone IP W these don't do the job.
In the last part of this lecture, I'll introduce an estimator that does