
Intro
Okay, so we talked about the average treatment effect.
We talked about randomized control trials.
We talked about why estimating average treatment effects in randomized trials is
very nice.
But we also talked about how not every setting in which one to
estimate an average treatment effect is a randomized trial.
And so then our next question is, what can we do there?
And so the setting we want to focus on now is one in which
we observe some pre-treatment covariates X.
And we're worried the treatment is not random in that it may be associated with
some of these pre-treatment covariates X.
If that's the situation, then we need to control for these X's, and
how best to do so is essentially the direction we're going.
In particular, we're going to want to see,
how does machine learning fit into all this?
Now, before going there, though, there's obviously a question,
under which conditions is controlling for these X's enough?
Under what conditions does kind of bringing these X's to the table help us,
enable us to identify an average treatment effect where kind of,
we're not in a randomized trial, and we of course need to be explicit about that?
So here, the assumption I'm going to be working with throughout
is assumption called unconfoundedness.
Whereby treatment may not be randomized overall, but
once you condition on X's, treatment is as good as random conditional on X.
As I'll discuss over the next couple slides, once you have this assumption,
controlling for X is enough to identify the average treatment effect.
And then that'll set us up to focus on our main question,
that is, so given that the average treatment
effect is identified, how do we estimate it?
All right, so to be a little more formal about this assumption,
Covariates and unconfoundedness
that is, that treatment is as good as random given measured covariates X.
What do I mean?
We're going to be in the same setup as before.
We have X, Y, W's with the same interpretation as before,
potential outcomes.
The definition of the average treatment effect is the same.
But instead of assuming that we have a randomized trial, as before,
a randomized trial, right, would just be with an orange here.
That is, that the treatment is random.
It's independent of the potential outcomes.
Here we're not going to assume that, and instead,
we're only going to assume that kind of once you condition on X's for
a fixed value of X, the treatment is as good as random.
So the treatment might not be randomized overall, but
once for every fixed value of X conditional and X,
the data looks like it comes from randomized trial.
This assumption is also known as selection on observable or unmeasured confounders.
What this means is that if there are any variables that W is associated
with in a way that makes you deviate from the randomized trial assumptions,
then you need to be able to measure them and
condition on them to bring you into this nice setup.
One question you might have here is, this is kind of in terms of the nomenclature,
we were worried about a confounding problem.
And here this assumption is referred to as unconfoundednness.
So what's up with that?
The point here is that if W, the treatment assignment probabilities
can vary with X's, then overall, you're confounded.
Overall, you don't have that randomized trial type assumptions.
But once you bring the X's to the table, once you condition on the X's, then at
that point, conditionally on X, you have the treatment looks as good as random.
So once you condition on X, you reached unconfoundedness.
So that's the meaning.
You were confounded before, now you brought an X, and
now you've achieved unconfoundedeness.
So this is the assumption.
It's really an important assumption.
I guess I felt the need to highlight it in three different colors.
The assumption does not hold in all applications.
For example, in instrumental variables problems,
you're interested in settings where this doesn't hold.
But in many settings of interest, it does hold.
And the rest of this week's lectures are going to be on inference about
the average treatment effect in something that's not a randomized trial,
but under unconfoundedness.
That is when this assumption holds.
So okay, we have an assumption, good, we have a question.
Now how do we proceed?
How do we estimate the average treatment effect under unconfoundedness?
There are many ways to go from here.
And I'm going to talk about one approach now, another approach in part three.
The double robust approaches can kind of combine both ideas to get
something really good.
But let's start from one idea, and it's the following.
Regression adjustments under unconfoundedness
In this general unconfoundedness setting,
the average treatment effect does not match the average
of Y conditional on W=1 minus the average of Y given W=0.
That was the last picture we saw in the previous part.
But what you can do is just try to do a similar derivation, but
now kind of re-express, what is the average treatment effect?
Well, we're just going to kind of, if you've
taken this will make perfect sense.
Otherwise, I hope you'll just by that derivation you get at the end is
reasonable.
We're going to kind of, by chain rule,
add a conditioning on X here, then kind of once we condition on X,
these three lines here are essentially the same proof as before.
What they say is if conditional on X, the expected treated potential outcome
is the same as the expected outcome conditional on X and receiving treatment.
And, okay, I'll let you stare at the derivation more on the side if you want.
The end result is that we find that the average treatment
effect can be expressed as the expected difference
between these conditional response functions,
where here mu WX is expectation of Y given X=x, W=w.
So mu WX is kind of the solution to the nonparametric regression problem
where we try to predict Y from X and W.
And what this calculation shows is that under unconfoundedness,
under this kind of assumption here, then the average treatment
effect is the expected difference in kind of your best prediction
given X of what would happen to you under treatment versus control.
If you were to kind of know these mu 1(x) and mu 0(x) functions [INAUDIBLE].
So this is kind of a characterization of POW.
How do we turn this into an estimation strategy?
Head battle is kind of a notation heavily suggests one,
mu w of x is a nonparametric regression problem, so you could try to solve it.
Here, the truth tau is the expectation of mu1(x) and mu0(x).
So what could we try?
We could try estimating mu0(x) from data.
So here kind of mu0(x) is the expectation of y among
controls conditional on x equals x.
So you could learn mu0(x) by learning to predict y from x among our controls or
similarly learn mu1(x).
And then estimate tau hat(x) by taking the difference over
your whole data set of these two regression functions.
And whatever shown so far is that if you were to do this using
the true mu0(x) and true mu1(x), then this will be
an unbiased estimate of the average treatment effect.
And let's say it's quite clear that this estimator
will be consistent the average treatment effect if
the mu hat w(x's) are consistent with the mu of uX.
So consistent is good, is okay, but this is actually good.
Does this, let you get confidence intervals and
so forth, and here it's complicated.
In order to kind of talk about how good this strategy is,
we of course, have in order to kind of talk about in general.
How good is this estimated average treatment effect by taking the average
difference in predictions from them, you want to make some mu0(x) functions.
We will talk about kind of specifically in steps 1 and 2.
How did you get these mu0(x) estimates?
And here there are many different strategies.
One of them the classical one would be to use linear regression or
kind of more formally ordinary least-squares or less.
So what is the OLS approach do?
It first starts, this is not algorithmic, but it's very important.
It start by positing a linear model.
Remember, muw(x) is measures what
is the expected value of y among treatments times W.
Given covalent values x, you're doing linear regression.
Linear regression fits linear functions.
So you're going to kind of find the right functional shape if the linear model is
actually correct, well specified.
So we're going to start by assuming the muw(x) is correctly specified linearly.
And then once we've done this, then it's kind of clear what we can do,
we can just kind of fit.
So mu0(x) is x times beta 0 and so forth.
We can estimate beta hat zero by just regressing y and x among the controls.
We can fit beta one by regressing y and
x among the treated, so this is just very standard.
And then once we kind of get, we can extract predictions from linear regression
as usual, and then what's our estimate of the average treatment effect?
Well, it's just going to be the average difference in predictions from
linear regression, as you'd expect, and I guess you can do the algebra.
This is equivalent to just taking the two regression parameters beta hat one and
beta hat zero, taking the difference and
inner product things out starts with x bar.
That is the average of the x's, because of typo here this should be divided by.
All right, so this is linear regression, is it good?
Is it bad? What are the pros and cons?
The classical approach: Pros and cons
He's pretty clear.
Linear regression essentially hinges on well specification of the linear model
in this setting.
What's the pro?
When the linear model is well specified, this is great.
This is simple, it's familiar, it's easy to run.
It has great guarantees,
it converges at parametric rate that gives you everything you could ever want.
What's the con?
Well, what if the linear specification doesn't hold,
what if you don't have linearity here?
Then linear regression just won't give you the right answer.
So, it's one of these things if kind of the parametric assumptions
you posit are valid, this is very good, otherwise, it's not.
So this is linear regression, what else can you do?
I think it's pretty clear where I'm going with this is in this class,
we want to use machine learning.
We want to avoid kind of assuming that functions are linear,
unless we have strong scientific reason to do so.
And so, okay, an idea here is let's pull the same strategy,
except instead of assuming that the function is muw(x),
have linear specifications that you can fit them by linear regression.
Let's just assume that they're genetic,
fit them by a machine learning and see what we get from there.
One thing I should emphasize here is kind of last week we talked
about machine learning as kind of black boxes.
There many machine learning black boxes, deep nets, boosted trees or
random forest, the last so on and so forth, that helps you predict y from x.
And here superficially we're not trying to do prediction.
Superficially, what we're trying to get is we're trying to get at these conditional
response functions.
muw(x) is expectation of y conditional on x and
w, but now it's just, should note the of under squared error loss.
What is the optimal prediction of y given x and w?
Well, it's just going to be, if you only know, x and
w then your best prediction of y is the expected value of y given x and w.
So actually an oracle would predict y hat I is muw(i).
So kind of a good predictive method should be predicting using something that's very
close to these functions.
So what we're going to assume is that when we train our machine learning method, and
it gets predictions.
Then these predictions are going to be cost this because kind of,
the better the predictive method,
the closer it's going to be to using these functions for prediction.
Regression adjustments. The machine learning approach
So where this leaves us is the idea is to pick our
favorite machine learning to predict y from x and w.
In general, I'm going to run this,
one could predict y from x separately on the treated or
either controls, or one could try to kind of fit a drunk model to both.
Talk more about that a couple of weeks from now.
Then one could use these predictions as estimates for the function we care about,
mu0(x) and mu1(x).
And then we're going to estimate tau hat as just the average of mu hat (1)(x) if
you mu hat (0)(xi) So just very concretely what's going on here, you had mu(1)(x).
This the way you kind of get it out of the machine learning method is you ask,
hey, here's a person with covariance xi, and they're treated.
What's your prediction for the outcome?
Machine learning method is going to tell you this.
Then the same person xi, now I'm going to tell you that they're not treated.
Can you predict what's outcome y going to b?
The machine learning method, well, this is going to be the prediction they get out.
And so then tau hat is average different predictions.
And really, the hope here is that machine learning methods
should enable accurate predictions without having to model
the shape of the mu(0)(x) and mu(1)(x) functions.
So it almost seems like, first, if machine learning methods
were just perfect, then it would almost be like a free lunch.
You don't assume linearity, but you fit the mu(1)(x) and
mu(0)(x) function anyways, and then you're good to go.
So, let's see how this plays out.
So here is the simplest way to see how it all plays out is just to try it.
Regression adjustments and unconfoundedness
So, I'm going to try to use the regression adjustment form throughout.
So all the estimators I'm going to consider are going to have this
kind of form.
And then I'm going to just try two different strategies for
learning them your hats.
We're going to get them out of linear regression or
we could get them out of some machine learning method.
This week, I'm going to use random forests as kind of a standard method for
generic machine learning.
If for no other reason is that there a machine learning method,
and they're very easy to run, and there's very few tuning parameters in them.
So kind of, they're very nice to use kind of reproducible examples, for that reason.
So it's not that they don't have tuning parameters, but you can run them with
default tuning parameters and that's good enough for an example.
So, all right, these are the two basic settings and
then I'm going to talk about them in two different simulation studies.
One were these kind of response functions, like expectation of y given x among
the treated and control separately, one where they're linear.
So linear regression as well specified, linear regression is justified and
one where they're not linear.
So linear regression has an incorrect specification.
And how does this work?
So here I just in the slides, kind of very briefly,
this is how you'd actually get tau hat out of linear regression.
I'm not going to go through this in detail, but just in case you wanted to run
this and wanted to copy paste in code, here's on the slide.
Similarly here is using the random forest similar thing
here kind of very explicitly, we're getting these
kind of mu.hat.0 or mu.hat.1's out of here.
And our estimate of the average treatment effect
is going to be the average difference in predictions, all right?
And what settings are we going to look at?
A simulation comparison
Well, just like I mentioned, we're going to look at a linear setting.
This is m by linear I mean that Y responds to X in a linear way,
that linear function may be different among three language all groups.
Notice this is normal noise with mean 0 and variance 4,
then the non-linear setting looks similar.
Except here now the relationship between Y and X is non-linear,
there's a step function in here,
there is a quadratic linear regression won't capture that correctly.
So what's going to happen?
Evaluating OLS
Well, linear regression,
it's, Probably they should be familiar what's going to happen.
I'm changing the sample size here.
So here n is the sample size at the low end we have 100 units to estimate
the average treatment effect, at the upper end we have 1600.
What happens here?
First, what I'm showing here is a box plot and this box plot shows the realization
of the average treatment effect you get across multiple simulations.
So the first thing to notice is it kind of regardless of the sample size,
The backbone is always centered.
Treatment and
the average treatment effect estimate you get by linear regression is unbiased.
This is good as you'd hoped,
this is kind of what else happens when you get more data?
Well, you're always unbiased so that's not something you're solving.
But the other thing that happens is kind of the box plot scenario,
you're getting more accurate, so kind of with 100 samples,
you're right on average, you're very wrong in most replications.
Whereas with 1600 samples, you're right on average, and
also you're pretty close to the truth most of the time.
So this is what you like to see.
What happens in the non-linear setting, where linear regression is misspecified?
Well, some things look like before, linear regression is going to
have the same average answer kind of regardless of the sample size.
It's going to give you that answer more and
more accurately as you collect more data.
But what's your problem?
Your problem is that, that average answer of linear
regression isn't equal to the true answer.
So here kind of the true average treatment effect was 0.
So here the dashed line, you would have wanted to get 0,
here you got 0 on average, whereas here you did not get 0 on average.
And, yeah, so this shows that linear regression kind of as you collect more and
more data, if the linear specification isn't right, it's hopeless, right?
You just won't get the right answer.
So what about random forests?
Here's actually very interesting, it's a completely different picture.
Evaluating Random Forests
Now, first thing is remember, here's 0 is the correct answer.
As you collect more data, you get closer to the correct answer in both settings.
So both in the linear setting and in the non-linear setting,
you're converging to the right answer and
here's the problem issue one needs to deal with.
We don't have this sitting like linear regression,
where kind of when you're well specified, not only you're getting more accurate, but
kind of even finite samples, you're unbiased.
Here, you're always converging to the right answer, but
infinite samples, you may be very biased.
Here in the linear setting, we see that kind of for all sample sizes and
looking at the point estimates for the average treatment effect
here are kind of strongly kind of systematic biased upwards.
We have a, they're not symmetric around 0 at all,
here the non-linear setting it's interesting from our sample sizes.
The treatment effects are kind of better centered at the right answer.
But suppose small samples you also work on a very biased.
So this is going to be a problem as as we're
going to see in kind of subsequent parts.
Really the reason this is the problem if all you cared about is getting the right
answer in very large samples, this wouldn't be a problem.
Like, I said, random forests are going to get you here consistency.
What consistency means is that in the limit of infinite data,
you're going to get the right answer.
But often when you're running this you care about more than consistency,
you want to get a good rate of convergence.
You want to use your data effectively and you want to get confidence intervals.
That's kind of even in moderate samples cover the truth and
the problem with with nominal probability.
And the issue is kind of when you have these kinds of very biased estimators,
it's essentially they're not going to have good rates of convergence.
And it's essentially hopeless to give confidence intervals at least
using standard constructions.
So that's an issue.
Linear regression vs Random Forests
What's the trade off between linear regression and random forests?
Linear regression fits on everything being linear, if this assumption is valid,
you get the biasness.
I haven't shown constructions with confidence intervals yet, but
kind of the fact that linear regression is unbiased is closely related to the fact
that confidence intervals all work here.
So, all right, if the linearity assumption is valid
everything works perfectly with linear regression.
If it fails everything goes out the window, there's nothing to do.
And this gets us into kind of a setting that might be quite familiar from
econometric classes, right?
You like think very hard about fitting a parametric model and
once you've picked the right parametric model then estimation is easy.
But machine learning, it really puts you in a different world.
Linear regression kind of depending on whether you wrote the right model down,
you're either essentially doing the right thing or the wrong.
But with random forests, you're kind of never quite wrong, but
you never crop quite right either.
You're never quite wrong in that you're always going to get the right answer with
infinite data.
But you're generally going to get there in a way that's kind of rather slow.
And in order to get accurate estimates of the average treatment detected,
use the data effectively or
to build confidence intervals you're going to have to do something about this.
