Intro
So thinking about machine learning and economics, or machine learning and econometrics, or machine learning and social science,
we can start by saying, what are we talking about here with machine learning? There's two big types of machine learning, there's actually lots of types of
machine learning beyond this reinforcement learning and different parts of AI. But two really big types for distinguishing for what the comments I'm
going to make today are between supervised and unsupervised machine learning. So unsupervised machine learning is when you have a bunch of videos, or you have
a bunch of pictures, or a bunch of documents, and there's no labels on them. Nobody has said that's a cat, that's a dog, to start with,
your input is just a bunch of objects. And what you're trying to do is put those into groups that are similar in some way.
So they might be images, and then when you put them into groups, you look at group number 5476, and
when you open up all the images in that group, you see that they're all cats.
So then you'd say, my machine learning algorithm discovered cats. What it actually did is it put a bunch of images together that it thought were
similar, and then later on you looked at it and you said, that looks like cats. But you didn't tell the algorithm that cats existed, or that there was any
specific reason to be looking for cats, that's just something that was discovered.
There's a little difference across disciplines with how these methods are used, or what their purpose is, they're generally a first step
towards something else, that something else can differ. It could be that you're going to use it as an explanatory variable in a regression.
Or it could be you're going to use it to describe features of products, there's many different things you might do with it afterwards.
But when it's done in this kind of isolated way, I feel like if you want to learn how to do this, you can just google it,
find some great videos, find something on Coursera. And if you're a social scientist, you can just apply the methods, and I don't
have anything new to say to you about how to do them, they're going to be similar.
I would say that political scientists used text quite a bit, and so some methods will get more popular in some discipline than others, but
fundamentally, there's not a difference in the goals. The place where things get, I think, a little bit more interesting, or
where things that seem alike are actually turn out to be different, is in supervised machine learning.
Which is the thing that sort of looks like running regressions, which is something that we do a lot of in the social sciences, and
we teach a lot of in econometrics class. So in supervised learning, you start with a setting where there's
independent observations in a stable environment, so each observation is exchangeable with another observation.
And in the simplest case, there's no correlation between them. So, a regression problem that we all teach in first year econometrics,
we're trying to build a model of the conditional mean, the expectation of y as a function of x.
And supervised machine learning is also about predicting y as a function of x,
so those basically look like the same thing. And classification, where in this case y would be discrete, so
y is maybe a label, is it a cat, a dog, or a horse. That's trying to understand which label is most appropriate given x is,
that looks like a multinomial logistic regression. Which is also something that we teach, and study, and use a lot in social sciences.
So it looks like supervised machine learning is the same thing as what we do in social sciences.
And to make them seem even more similar, when you take a machine learning course, probably the first prediction model you learn is regression,.
And probably the first classification model you learn is logistic regression.
So this all sounds like we're solving exactly the same problem. But then what's kind of funny about it, is that we do these things differently, and
so I want to kind of talk to you a little bit about why we approach that same problem in different ways.
And actually why it's meaningful to ask different questions from those same methods.
Classification
So just to start with though, let's kind of take a look at an example of classification of one of the most common
problems that's been studied in machine learning. And one of the biggest successes from the last 15 years,
is our improvement in the ability to solve classification problems. So, typical classification problem is, you have a bunch of pictures,
say pictures of animals. These pictures you downloaded from the web, and
what you're trying to do is to classify them. So in the classification problem, you're starting with a training data set,
where you have images and you have labels. So in your training data set, the data set you're using to estimate your model,
you have labels, the Y's, like cat, dog, of course, and you have the pictures.
In order to build this classification model, there's some processing you have to do. So, first of all,
you have to translate the image into observable characteristics of the image. And just a simple way to think about that,
is on your computer screen you're staring at right now. You can make an image of me talking to you or my slides, using red, green, blue, and
the brightness of each of those colors, and that together will create an image.
So that's one way you can translate an image just into bits and bytes.
They're the pixels, each of the pixels, and then for red, green, blue, how bright they are, and now I've got a digital description of the image.
Then I want to put that into a model and classify, given X, is this a cat?
Now, already there's a little bit of a gap, because in some machine learning applications,
you're not actually trying to build a model that gives a probability of a cat.
You're just want to say, is it a cat? So, when these algorithms work in production, they're not necessarily
spitting out a probability, they might be, they might not be. They might just be spitting out cat dog, cat dog, and it might actually take
additional computation for it to spit out a probability. Well, if we were studying this problem in economics,
we would be building a logistic regression and trying to use that to come up with a probability.
And actually, the way that we use the regression in economics, would typically be that we would be interested in the coefficients,
we would be interested in the function itself. And we would be trying to understand, if I change something, if I change an X,
how would that change the probability? So we would be really trying to understand the model rather than just spit out,
is it a cat or is it a dog? Now, so some of the big advances for images, neural nets turned out to work really well, and
who knew that that would be the case, but they are a very rich functional form. And so, what the advances in machine learning have been all about,
is figuring out how to solve this hard problem, where you have all these bits that are representing pixels.
And I'm going to to somehow get a meaningful prediction out of that. And the neural nets can be thought of as a very flexible functional forum to do that.
Example
So, here's an example of why machine learning is great, this is a marketing brochure from McKinsey.
And so, in this marketing brochure, the problem was to predict which customers would churn, and that means to abandon a service.
And we have on the x axis and y axis of this, we have two drivers of churn,
and you can imagine that might be, How often you've logged into the website or
some other behavior, it could be a characteristic of a person. So these are the X variables that could be used to predict churn.
And so the McKinsey is in this picture contrasting a churn model based on a simple, old fashioned logistic regression.
So in the logistic regression, they have got a binary outcome turned or no churn, and they have these characteristics of the consumers.
And they're using those characteristics to predict churn. And this nice smooth green line is the ISO probability line for so
everybody along all the drivers A, drivers B pairs along that line have the same probability of churn.
And so MyKinsey pointing out that in these hand tunes simple, functional forms that people would write down by hand, you would have a very
simple relationship between drivers A and drivers B in terms of predicting churn.
Now all these fancy hills and valleys are what come out of the machine learning model. So I'm going to assume that McKinsey ran the software correctly.
And so that McKinsey's model did a better job classifying churn than the simple logistic regression model.
So that's good. And let's assume that's true. And then we can also assume that it's true that this kind of complicated relationship
between a and b in terms of prediction was actually better at predicting outcomes in a test set.
Let's imagine that's true. But how would you do as a social scientist or even as a business person trying to use this output to make decisions.
So if you took this literally if you held drivers A at 80, an increased drivers B.
What this model seems to be telling you if you interpret it that way is that if you help drivers A fixed and you increase drivers B that the probability of churn
would go up and then down and up and then down and up and then down. So you have all these hills and valleys in the probability.
So if you went out and tried to think about making decisions based on that,
you might get some counterintuitive results and it might not be the best guide about which customers to recruit.
And it might also not be that convincing on an mechanisms. So you think why is that?
Well, part of the thing is the goal of a predictive model is just to predict. It was estimated and
trained the shape of the functional form was all about just getting the Y.
Right, getting the best prediction of whether you're going to chun or not.
And that's different from a causal analysis where I might want to say, what what if B is something I can affect?
Like, what if I could get people to login to the website more? Well, would I want to try to get people to log in the website more,
do I think that would actually cause them to turn less? That's a very different question.
And you would estimate the model very differently to answer that question. And so one of the insights in the recorded lectures will go into much
more detail about is, when you could or couldn't interpret a model in terms of causality, in terms of what you might want to manipulate,
or even in terms of who you might want to target for something.
And so there's different objectives for different kinds of questions and actually your estimation techniques should differ depending on the question you're asking.
To think about this another way, we could use this model to try to predict who should we call, who should get a phone call?
Now the McKinsey model is going to be very good at figuring out who's likely to quit.
But maybe some of those people are quitting your service because they graduated and they're moving away.
Maybe they're graduating from Stanford and they're going to move to a different country or they're going to move to a different city.
So calling people who are going to move away is not going to be very beneficial for a company.
So that's thinking at a higher level. If you were trying to use a prediction model, predicting who's going to quit
isn't the same as finding the people for whom you should interview. Those are different questions and you would use different models to answer them.
So that's really going to be one set of themes that we're going to want you to learn from this class.
If you go to econometrics class, they're going to assumed you're trying to understand what happens if I hold everything fixed and I change one variable
because that's one of the ways when we think about regression. Well if you go to machine learning class,
they're going to assumed that you want to predict or you want to classify. And so the objectives are actually different.
Machine Learning
Machine learning is great it can fit these complex shapes so my friend who was at Microsoft made this goodness of fit for Clippy the paperclip who was Microsoft's
first AI, Clippy didn't work very well sadly was not a very good AI. But we can use AI to fit Clippy shape.
And finally, 15 or 20 years later, we actually have help assistants that actually do help us unlike a poor little Clippy, who was made fun of.
Prediction
So, just to put a little more structure on the comments I made earlier and again,
this will be elaborated on further in the additional recorded lectures this week.
But when we think about prediction the goal of prediction Is going to be to estimate a single number.
What is my, if it's Y, what is my best prediction of Y? And I'm going to do that to try to minimize the mean squared error in a new
data set we're only X is observed. So the standard problem of machine learning is that I have a data set with
Y's and X's, I build a model. If you give me new X's, I can predict what the Y will be.
So if you think about it from a professor's perspective, I could hire a research assistant, give them some X's and Y's and
tell them to go back and build a model. And then in my office, I'm going to hide some data and I know the X's and the Y's.
When the research assistant comes back, I'll see I'll give them the X's, and I'll test them on how well they can pick the Y's.
And all I need to know I don't need to know how the research assistant did it. I don't care if they built a neural net or a random forest or something else.
I just care that I'm going to just give you a pop quiz. I'm going to feed in the Xs and you're going to tell me the Ys and
I'm going to score you just based on those Ys nothing else. Okay, and so the machine learning problem is actually then a sort of a simple
problem, because I don't care what you did or why it works. I just cared that it works and if my,
the actual way I want to use the model is again to give it more X's and have it predict more Y, all I care is that it works.
So it's kind of machine learning you can think of as like a robotic research assistant. I used to go tell my research assistant to run 100 regression.
Now I've got a robotic research assistant and they're going to run a billion regression and they're going to come back with the best one, and
I'll be able to tell right away if they did a good job. Okay, so that's that's what machine learning is good at.
Now there's some details like, it turns out that minimizing mean squared error is going to actually entail a bias variance trade off and
it's always going to accept some bias. So that's a different objective than trying to get an unbiased estimate of
the conditional mean function. The idea of how these machine learning algorithms work is you consider a family
of models, and you use the data to select among the models and the common approach is cross validation.
So it's like to prepare for your big test. You pretend that you're studying for a test. You hide some of the data from yourself and see how well you do.
And so then you give yourself a bunch of pop quizzes, simulating the scenario that you will later face in my office.
And you find the thing that does best in your little pop quizzes that you're giving to yourself where you hide some data from yourself.
You figure out the thing that works best. Once you've got that all sorted out, then you come to my office and
I give you the final test and see how well you did. But if you practiced well and simulated the testing environment, you will probably
have found something that will also work well in the test set that I hid from you. And machine learning basically works well because you can accurately evaluate
performance without a lot of additional assumptions. All you have to see is how well it fits, because its only goal is to fit.
You don't have to argue about additional assumptions. Yeah, you can argue about whether the environment you're going to apply it in is
actually stable, maybe it's going to change over time. There's a few things to argue about. And of course, you can argue a lot about whether the algorithms are fair,
biased or have some societal implication. But did they work?
Not much to argue about. So, I'm going to do a little bit of provocative discussion here and
Machine Learning vs Economics
I should say, I consider myself a machine learning person. So, I can make fun of both economists and
machine learning because I publish in both journals and go to both conferences. So I can make fun of both sides.
I'm going to say, what do we say versus what do we do coming from the machine learning perspective? Machine learning basically says machine learning is everything.
And actually we probably invented it, I think, right? Nobody ever did anything before machine learning was the thing. So, I've been told many times by machine learning folks that if economists
had had anything to say about how I use data, somebody would have told me, it would have showed up on my machine learning class.
And I've been asked even, do economists use data? I thought they did theory.
So, there's a little bit of a lack of appreciation for the fact that
many disciplines, political science and economics and biostatistics and
so on, had been grappling with statistical problems for decades and even centuries.
And have had some ideas along the way that are helpful for solving certain kinds of problems.
Machine learning often, though, will use the language of answering questions or
solving problems, even when they are not answering questions or solving problems.
So it's very common, and I see this a lot with startups. A startup will come to me and say, I have software for prioritizing customers.
Like the turn example I gave, I have software that will help you prioritize which people should get a sales call to prevent them from turning.
And I'd say great, let's see your prioritization software, and what they'll show me as a model for predicting churn.
But again, as we previously discussed, being able to predict who's going to quit is not the same as determining who should your sales people call.
The people who are most predictably going to quit might be people who are moving away and are not at all affected by a sales call.
So they'll say I've got this great AI Algorithm that will prioritize your consumers for you.
But in fact this great AI algorithm is actually just prediction and
it's predicting the wrong thing. It's not predicting the thing you would want for prioritization.
Now it could be helpful for prioritization, because certainly, predicting people who are not going to quit means those people
probably shouldn't get a sales call. But among the people who might quit, you need something else to figure out
who should you actually call, for whom would a call be effective? That's a causal question.
And so, people in social sciences are very used to thinking about well gee, do you even have data that could possibly answer that question?
We spend tons of time thinking about, is your question even answerable? And that's not the type of thinking that you're taught in a basic machine
learning class. You just assume every question is answerable, and you just need good algorithms.
Add a few layers to your neural net and I'm sure the problem is now solvable. That's kind of the mentality that you get from especially
introductory of basic machinery. So, basically what we say is we can do everything and we've solved most problems.
We have a great hammer and everything is a nail. And that's sort of true, as a general purpose technology,
prediction is incredibly applicable. And you can have the same algorithms that can be used across lots of domains.
So it's actually really important for economics actually, big picture economics, it's a general purpose technology.
And it can be used really widely and we can make algorithms open source and they can affect a lot of the world. So I'm a big believer in that, and I give entire lectures on that.
But it's not true that just off the shelf, that every question is best answered using just those tools.
And that's where there's a big divergence between social sciences and machine learning.
So, generally what machine learning people actually do is they use predictive models, they ignore other questions, whether it's causality, equilibrium, feedback effects.
And then they have little conferences or subfields that sit around and wonder or worry about interpretability, reliably, robustness,
fairness, but they have little ways to ask algorithms to optimize for it. And a lot of times a lot of the literature on fairness is viewed as like
an ex-post thing. I'm going to verify that my algorithms are fair or I'm going to put constraints on
them, rather than actually completely changing the way you think about them, which would be, I think, more of a social science approach.
Bias in Economics
So traditional econometrics, economists often focus on the case with a lot more observations and covariates.
Every one of you who made it through your first year econometrics or courses had to probably memorize the proof for your final exam, that OLS is blue.
I still have the little sticky notes sticking out of my econometrics textbook for the page with the proof for OLS is blue.
So what does that mean, for those of you who haven't had to take that final exam? That means that ordinary least squares is the best linear,
unbiased estimator of the coefficients of a linear prediction model, okay?
So, ordinary least squares is trying to be unbiased. Now, when I studied that proof and dutifully passed my exams and got an A,
without ever really contemplating deeply why I wanted things to be unbiased.
The way it was presented it was just, of course, that's what you want. And why would you want anything else? Why would you want something biased?
Whereas in machine learning when you're trying to do prediction in a test set with a model that may be very rich relative to the size of your data set,
you explicitly allow for bias. Because there's a bias variance trade off in predictions, and
the lectures this week will go into that in substantially more detail. But to start to even see where that breaks apart, if you have more parameters and
you have observations, it's obvious that OLS is not going to be good at anything,
it's going to be overfit. Economists instead worry about estimating causal effects and
what's called identification. Identification means if I had an infinite amount of data,
could I answer my question? And just to think of an example where you might not be able to,
consider the problem of hotels. So a causal question about hotels might be,
if I raise the price of my hotels, how many customers will I lose?
That's a business question. And it's something that we study a lot in economics and in marketing,
what happens if I change the price? Now, I might go out and collect data.
I could collect data, I could have somebody, I could scrape prices from hotels.com, or something like that I could figure out what prices were.
And I could hire a research assistant to stand outside a hotel and count the people coming in and out, once a week or something like that, right?
So, then I could put together a data set that had quantities and prices in it, okay?
And then, I could try to build some kind of a model. I could run a regression.
Quantities on the left side, prices on the right side. Now, what would the coefficient be on prices in that regression?
Well, if you ever have gone to a conference or stayed in a hotel, had a school vacation, you would probably realize that actually,
when the prices are high for the hotel, it's probably full.
So, you'll get a positive coefficient that regression, high prices, high quantities.
And indeed if your goal was prediction, suppose my goal was for some reason I wanted to guess how many people were in the hotel
on a particular day, high prices is a great signal that that hotel is full. From a predictive perspective, high prices predict high quantities.
That's a fact. True in the data, absolutely true. And by the way, this is true for a lot of data sets.
This is why economists started worrying about this, because in many data sets, prices and quantities are actually positively correlated.
So, where's the breakdown here? Well, the causal question is, what if I hold everything fixed and
I change the price? But you never had in your data a chance for somebody ran an experiment on prices.
If you did, you may not know about it and your data. And so, in your data, the variation is coming from holidays and
conferences, and too many weddings that weekend other things that increase both demand and supply, and
that induces this correlation and the data between prices and quantities.
But that doesn't mean if you intervene and raise price that you will sell more hotel rooms.
So economists think about that all the time. And if they ended up finding a way to figure out how to estimate this
relationship, it's probably true that their predictive model would have very low explanatory power,
because the biggest thing for predicting quantities is knowing the price. High prices high quantities, if you're trying to predict,
that's going to explain most things. But if you're looking for natural experiments in price, where price changed for a reason that didn't have to do with a holiday,
you're probably not going to have very many of those price changes, and you're not going to have a very good ability to predict quantities.
But you will learn more about what happens when you change price. And that's what economists and social scientists really focus on,
counter factual prediction separating correlation from causality. We also obsess on standard errors,
because it's actually really hard to learn causal effects. And it's very common that something you find is actually not that well pinned
down, and your coefficients could be due to sampling variation. So, causal effects, we spend a lot of time worrying about sampling variation.
It's also the case that it's very hard to tell if you got the right answer. Because it depends, and so you really want theory to be playing a role, and
you want to think about the statistical properties of your estimators.
So, those are things economists worry about. And we also are very aware that identification problems can't be evaluated
just using a holdout set. So, if prices and quantities are positively correlated in my whole data set.
If I take a random sample, prices and quantities will also be positively correlated in my test set.
I'm not going to figure out from a test set that I misunderstood why If prices and quantities were positively correlated, the test set isn't going to do that.
And some of my research and I'll talk about this at the end, we we construct very specially constructed test sets,
that can actually help you understand whether you got the answer right. But it's not just a random sample of the data that's going to fix your
problem for you. So of course, I can also make fun of econometrics, what we say versus what we do.
Economics vs Machine Learning
What we say is that we do causal inference and counterfactuals. We think about the data generating process.
And we say the God of economics gave us the model. And we pretend that we just estimated one model.
We say the God of economics told me that log of wages depends on the log of something else, and something else squared, and something else cubed.
And we then report cause limits and appropriate standard errors, plus a few additional specifications for robustness.
Now, what we actually do is we go and tell our research assistants to run 100 different specifications, just to make sure it doesn't change our results.
And then we kind of pick five representative ones, and we show them, and we produce them as if we hadn't done that at all.
Now, it's not that we're all bad people. I mean, maybe we are, but is that necessarily true that we're all bad people for doing it that way?
Instead, we're working with what we have if you like, and we didn't really have a good way to try to do this robustness systematically.
And of course, you don't want to publish your result which goes away if you add in a cubic term. So, you want to be sure that you're accurately representing the way the world
works, because people are going to use your results for policy. So, one of the things that machine learning can do is,
it can take us out of that conundrum. It can give us a way to do robustness systematically,
fully describe honestly what we did, and still be able to report results about the parameters we care about.
And that's going to be one of the things we'll teach about in this course how we do that. How we get rid of that very uncomfortable, unpleasant, and
unreliable part of research, where we just run a bunch of specifications, and hope we've been comprehensive enough, and hope we haven't been so comprehensive
that we've screwed up, and gotten data fishing for our favorite result.
Key Lessons for Economics
So, some key lessons for econometrics. Many problems can be decomposed into predictive and causal parts.
And one of the things we're going to show is that once you do that decomposition, then you can use off-the-shelf machine learning for some of the predictive parts.
We also want to learn from machine learning, how to do data driven model selection. But we want to do it a little differently,
we want to be tailored to our econometric goals, tailored to parameter estimation. And there's some insights, things like cross fitting that
come up once we tailor our estimation for our goal. And we also might use different optimization criteria,
different objective functions, depending on our goal. So, we're going to modify things in a way that optimizes for a specific objective
like parameter estimation and retains the ability to do inference.
Machine learning approaches for robustness. Another thing we can learn, validation.
Machine learning always has a test set. I've worked on some of my historical research about auctions had that kind
of setting where I had two different auction models, and I estimated using one auction game and predicted another auction game,
but that's been relatively rare in economics. And so, one of the things that I've been working on in my own work is how to come
up with clever ways to what types of data sets to look at, and ways to define test sets that help us assess better weather,
we've done a good job with counterfactuals. And I'm someone that's in supermarket data where we have lots of price changes.
We've also can learn other computational approaches, even for structural models. Things like Stochastic gradient descent are really powerful computational
techniques, they can unlock a lot of performance in instructional models, and I'll talk more about at the end of the course.
So, prediction in five years. A lot of these techniques will be standard in social sciences, and honestly they
Prediction in 5 Years
already are becoming a standard, they're becoming a requirement, not an option.
Regularization and data driven model selection will be standard prediction problems, the part where you really do just care about a prediction,
it will be better appreciated and better delineated from causal models. Measurement using machine learning techniques might be an important subfield.
Textual analysis will get bigger and again, it's already very big in some parts of Economics and Political Science.
We'll be better and more careful about explicitly distinguishing causal parts and predictive parts of models.
And then, we'll delegate the parts that are more predictive to machine learning and data driven fit.
We're going to have reduced emphasis on sampling variation, and more on model robustness.
And we may consider models with lots of latent variables or factor models more commonly for panel data or different types of data structures,
that are not just single shot independent observations, okay?