Intro
Hi and welcome to this first of a set of Webinars on practical applications of
machine learning to behavioral science, and
applied econometrics more broadly joined with ideas 42.
I am Jann Spiess, I'm an assistant professor of operations Information and
Technology at the Graduate School of Business of Stanford University, and
also an affiliate of the Gallup capital social impact lab.
In this first chapter of our webinar,
I will give an introduction to machine learning from an applied perspective.
Specifically, I will target researchers and practitioners of applied econometrics,
who think about how to add machine learning to the econometric toolbox and
are interested in learning how novel tools based on machine
learning can improve practical empirical analysis.
When we think of machine intelligence,
we may think of futuristic scenes like this one from Ex Machina, where a machine
takes on human form and can communicate to us as if it was a human.
So this may be kind of futuristic machine intelligence and
not what we have right now.
However, there is a lot of machine intelligence that is already available to
us and then we have in our pockets everyday.
So just to give you one example, Facebook for example,
Advances in Machine Intelligence
recognizing not just were in a picture is a face but
also which of your friends is in that picture is an amazing feat of
machine intelligence that is already available to all of us.
Another example would be Google Translate, so
Google Translate is not only able to take a picture of some written text,
convert this picture into something a computer can understand, but
also then to take that text, and translated into a different language.
And then further superimposed that new translated sentence over the original one.
So all this is available already in your pocket.
As a final example, consider self driving cars.
While full adoption of self driving cars may still be a few years away,
modern cars are able to detect obstacles in their environment and
take evasive action and some cars are even able to completely drive themselves.
So just consider this amazing feat of engineering, that a car that you can
buy these days is able to actually detect what's going on around it and
itself able to take driving decisions which used to be done by a human.
And so these examples very much form a motivation for
what I'm going to cover in those next few modules.
So specifically, first I want to ask, how is it possible that we are now
able to solve such complicated machine intelligence tasks, and second,
I want to ask, given what we know about these machine intelligence tasks and
how they are solved, can we learn anything for Applied Econometrics?
And can we learn anything from that that would allow us to perform some interesting
analysis or improve some analysis that we usually do when we for example,
analyze a field experiment.
Machine Intelligence in the Field
To understand better how modern machine intelligence works,
I want to start with one illustration that I found a few years ago in a New Yorker.
So this is a story of cucumber farm in Japan,
where these three people which is a couple and their son run this farm together.
And so, in order to achieve the good price for cucumbers,
it's very important to correctly classify them by their quality,
and usually that is the job of the mother which is on the right here.
And so now the son who's here on the left, he wants to help his mother and
ask how can I somehow help her with a tedious task of taking each cucumber and
then assessing its quality and organizing it into different quality categories.
And so what the son does is the son built a machine, and that machine automatically
takes pictures of each cucumber in order to decide what quality that cucumber is.
And so now what we see here is basically a camera attached to a computer
together with some contraption that makes sure that you know one cucumber
after the other gets taken a picture off.
And I now want to think about how would we program that computer,
in a way that the computer would allow us to see which quality cucumber and
it's currently taking a picture of.
And so, in other words, how could we program this computer in a way that would
support the work of the mother, whose job exactly that usually is,
taking a cucumber deciding on its quality.
So just take a moment and think about that for yourself.
You have a computer, the computer takes a picture, you have this big picture lots
of pixels and now you want to decide is this good cucumber or not?
So, note first that the structure of this is very much the structure of what
Cucumber Classification Problem
we call a classification problem.
We have some data which I call x, and that data x here
constitutes of the many pixels of the pictures.
And I want to look at this data x, and based on the data x,
I want to decide what is the likely quality of that cucumber.
So is that a high quality cucumber, a low quality cucumber?
So I don't know about you, but when I first thought of that question,
here's how I would have thought about solving it.
I would have thought about solving it by trying to understand what
are the features of a cucumber that makes it quality, and then write some
computer program that tries to identify exactly those properties in my image.
For example, maybe I would have tried to write a small program that tries to figure
out the specific pixels that belong to the cucumber or belong to the background.
And then based on that, for example, measure the color of a cucumber and
say this is a particularly good cucumber,
if the color is very healthy, it's very healthy for me.
Maybe I would have also programmed some small program that would try
to measure the curvature of the cucumber and
say depending on the curvature, and maybe of the dimensions of the cucumber,
this would be a cucumber that could sell for a higher or lower price.
And this is very much how old style artificial intelligence used to look like.
So the idea here is that we try to understand how a human would take such
decisions, and we then code up a computer to do that automatically.
So the computer would look at different features of that picture, and
based on those different features, the computer would then decide, is that a high
quality cucumber or not based on some rules that we coded, for example,
has it a certain maximum of a certain curvature, does it have a healthy color?
And then if it does have those things then okay this is going to be a high quality
cucumber.
So this approach to artificial intelligence was not very successful.
So instead, the modern way of doing artificial intelligence, of doing machine
intelligence, specifically of leveraging on machine learning is to turn
this question into a question of effectively training, on training data and
applying our knowledge on new data, in other words, a question of statistics.
Specifically that new SAR machine learning tries to induce
the structure in a mapping from pixels to cucumber quality.
Not by human intuition or introspection, but largely from training data.
So how could that work in this case?
In this case, we could take what is called labeled data.
So data where we already know which quality cucumber each
of the pictures corresponds to, and then fit a function that
maps each of those images to one of the quality categories.
And by fitting such a function,
we solve this classification problem by finding one that fits particularly well.
Isn't This Just Statistics?
Now, what I just explained, which is that machine learning would solve this
intelligence tasks by simply looking at training data.
Finding a function that map's the pixels to the quality, and
then applying that on new pictures that it hasn't seen yet.
Well, that very much just looks like statistics.
In statistics, we also use some data often that has a form of having
some outcome variable y, some covariance x, and
we want to extract some structure that relates the x variables to my y variables.
So what is different here?
Well, one first obvious difference between the world of machine learning that
allows us to solve such problems as the cucumber classification problem,
is that the functions that make it work look quite different.
So think back to some say introductory econometrics, where we are also fitting
some function to the relationship between outcome and right hand side variables.
So one function that we may fit there is a simple linear regression or
maybe in the case where the outcome is binary, so it's either high or
low quality, we would fit something like a logistic regression.
So is it a logistic regression, that may work well for
data where there's only a few x variables.
But in this case, our x variables are all the pixels of our image.
And that is simply a very high dimensional vector for
which the logit that we have on the slide here, wouldn't work particularly well.
It wouldn't work particularly well first,
because that vector x is far too high dimensional for it to work well.
That second, despite this vector x being far too complex,
the function that we fit it to would not be complex
enough to capture the relationship of pixels to quality well.
And that's because, for understanding an image well, we don't just have
to know whether each pixel is say a one or a zero or has this color that color.
We actually also have to understand how neighboring pixels relate to each other.
And in other words, these standard functional forms are very inadequate for
a number of reasons.
And the functions that we require here are much, much more complex.
So specifically, what we may be using here,
rather than a simple logistic regression, is something called a neural network,
where the outcome, which is on the right here.
Is not going to be a function simply of the inputs, not simply of the x variables.
So the x variables are on the left here.
But they are also a function of some intermediate variables in the middle here.
So think of this in the following way.
The output, so my final prediction is going to be not a function of the pixels,
but it's going to be something like a function of functions of the pixels.
So it's going to be something like a logit of logits of my pixels.
Now, in practice, we don't just use logits of logits,
we actually use many, many often more than ten such layers.
And so as we move from simple neural networks to deep learning, we add more and
more layers.
And so in this example, for example, my prediction would be
something like a logit of a logit of a logit of my input variables.
Some Features of Machine Learning (ML)
So when we therefore think about what makes machine learning work and
what makes it different from standard linear regression type methods,
then a first obvious difference is that it works with much more flexible,
richer, data driven models.
Then our typical linear regression approach.
And because it does so,
it is actually able to work with very high dimensional data such as image data.
So we don't have to take a very strong stance on just having only a few hours to
look at, but we can work with many more variables.
Let it be in images or in other data.
Now in order to make that work,
I will argue in the next module that we need two other crucial ingredients.
The first ingredient is that we actually have to limit the expressiveness of our
functions to avoid overfit, so that we make sure that what the machine finds when
it searches through those very complex functions, isn't going to be spurious.
And second,
we can actually use the data to decide how much of that expressiveness to allow.
In other words, how much to regularize, which will be called tuning.
A final nice feature of these machine learning tools, and
it makes them really influential is that they are readily available.
So in addition to those conceptual breakthroughs, and I should say that some
of those insights had already been around in statistics for a very long time.
We now also have the ability to work with very complex data that is readily
available in an automated way because we have the computational capacity to do so.
And these tools, these software tools are also available to all of us.
So just to give you an example, in this cucumber example with the family in Japan.
The son of that family was actually able to implement this cucumber classifier
by leveraging an openly available tool provided by Google, in this case,
TensorFlow, to solve this intelligence task and code this app.
So all of us would be able to actually implement that on our own computers or
maybe in the cloud.
So when I talk about features of machine learning here,
I should say that I'm going to focus on one specific type of machine learning.
And specifically,
I'm going to focus on supervised machine learning that focuses on prediction.
So I have some data where I have labels, so I have data, we have Ys and Xs and
I want to learn the relationship between that Y and that X.
And the idea behind using machine learning to solve the kind of tasks that
are not evaded that this talk with in the beginning was to turn intelligence tasks
into supervised learning problems.
So cucumber classification was one example.
Here it was about finding the good cucumbers.
But you could also think about doing something similar.
When a bank or lender decides who to give credit to and
works with past records of somebody's financial behavior and
wants to decide whether to give them credit, which basically boils down to
trying to predict how likely that person is to default on their loan.
Similarly, in public policy,
we could think of a tax authority deciding which returns to audit.
Usually a human would go through tax returns and check one which ones to audit.
But here we could instead say, why don't we simply turn this into a supervised
learning problem, where the goal is to find those returns that are problematic.
And we use training data from the existing audits to find those.
Other examples, image recognition and I want to pause for one moment and ask you,
how would you think of self driving cars in that context?
So what would a self driving car learn from a supervised-learning approach?
Or how could we train a self driving car using a supervised-learning approach?
So just take a moment to think about it.
Think One first obvious way in which we could leverage supervised learning
algorithms here are in the kind of machine intelligence image recognition way,
where we use the images that a sensor of self driving cars generates.
And then use that in order to, for example, identify obstacles,
identify trees, and then we can write a rule that says there's a tree we should
probably not drive against it.
But, my point here just to drive this point home is that if
you wanted to blog on a self driving car, we could do it in an even simpler way.
We could do it in a way that is purely a task of supervised learning or prediction,
doesn't have to be the best one and certainly not the way that self
that state of the art self driving cars end up working.
But just to kind of highlight the power of this paradigm.
What you could have done is you could have simply
taken all these sensor inputs as your x variable and
as your y variable, you could have taken the steering actions of a human.
You could have simply predicted what does a human do when a human is in that or
that situation based on all the sensor inputs.
And using that,
you could implement the first self driving car that takes all the senses input.
It knows what situations into that but you don't hold up anything about the logic of
driving, you simply rely on learning what a human would do in a similar situation.
Again, I'm not saying that this is how a state of the art self driving cars
are actually in the end working because for them, we want to have a lot of more
guardrails, we want to actually know a little bit more what's going on.
But just embracing this idea of supervised learning, this is how we could do it.
Advances in Supervised Learning
So, in addition to being widely available,
supervised learning has also been incredibly successful.
And now just want to highlight that with one small example.
And that example is going to be image recognition.
So there is a standardized data set and a standardized competition in order
to evaluate the quality of machine learning predictors in image recognition.
And that is called image net.
So the database of many images and using those images, the competition
is basically about I give you a large training data set with many of the images,
where the images are already labeled.
So for each image, I tell you what it is.
And then I give you a new set of images, where I don't tell you what they show, and
I asked your machine learning algorithm to tell me what the machine learning
algorithm can identify those pictures.
And because you haven't seen yet what the ground truth here is,
I can then compare that to what that image really shows.
So here, for example, are a number of images as well as their true label,
meaning what they really show and the best guesses by one of
the machine learning algorithms that was tested on this data set.
So for example, the second on the left on the top would be a container ship.
So for example, the second on the left on the top would be a container ship.
So it is a container ship and the machine learning algorithm says that's most
likely, so in this case machine learning algorithm was right.
Let me give you one example where the machine learning algorithm got it
slightly wrong.
So, this picture on the bottom here second from the right is actually
characterized as cherry.
And the machine learning algorithm says this was a dog which actually makes a lot
of sense because there's also dog visible in the picture.
So in this case, what the machine learning algorithm says actually makes a lot of
sense despite it being not a correct classification here.
Another one here on the right is a Madagascar cat.
Honestly, I wouldn't have known that myself.
And the machine learning algorithm says this is likely going to be a squirrel or
a monkey, a squirrel or monkey, sorry.
Which I think is a totally reasonable guess, but
in this case will be considered a mistake.
So, before I go to show you the results of how well machine learning does I
just want you guys to think, first, what do you think how many mistakes
would a machine learning algorithm make on these pictures?
And second, as I just said, even if I got it wrong, like how good would a human be?
And so the number I'm about to look at will be the percent that we get wrong.
So we ask the algorithm or we ask a human to classify each of those pictures and
we compare it against the labels we have on new data,
where the machine learning algorithm hasn't seen the ground truth.
And then we count in how many percent of cases does the machine learning algorithm
get it wrong.
So, without further ado, let me get to the results.
So this is how the performance of the top performing machine learning algorithm
has developed over the last 10 or so years.
So first to start with machines got it wrong around 1/3 of the time,
which to be honest, is already pretty impressive.
Had I not known anything about machine learning,
I would have been impressed by a machine learning algorithm that gets it right
2/3 of the time when assigning such detail labels.
But the really shocking thing is that this improved massively over
the last 10 years alone.
And I don't have up to date data here.
So by 2017, it had already hit around 2%, so assume this is now around 2% mistakes.
What is even more remarkable about that that a human gets
it wrong around 5% of the time.
So in other words, machines are now systematically outperforming humans in
something that we would have thought as one of the things that humans
are particularly good at, which is in this case, image recognition.
Now, I presented here advances in supervised learning, in other words,
advances in prediction, for example, image recognition.
Advances Beyond Supervised Learning
The results I just shared show the incredible success of machine learning at
solving supervised learning or prediction tasks.
But the success of machine learning goes far beyond the supervised learning tasks.
And I think there are many other areas we will hopefully be able to learn from.
So specifically, there has been a whole area of so called unsupervised learning,
which tries to find structure in data where there are no labels but instead, for
example, tries to find clusters of points that look similar to each other.
Another example in that space is topic modeling that we can for example,
apply powerfully to understand structure in texts.
So topic models aim to group documents, for example,
by their topics in order to automatically extract structure from massive
copper of texts that would then allow us to understand, for example,
how text has changed systematically over time or how certain topics have
changed over time or what the prevalent themes in a large body of text is.
I want to end this small overview over the successes of machine learning.
One other example that has a slightly different structure that I think shows
nicely how far we've come from classical artificial intelligence, and
all the way to where we are at these days with modern machine learning.
And that is humans playing against computers or more specifically, computers
more and more winning against humans at very complex games like chess and golf.
So, when computers first beats humans convincing via chess,
the idea behind the program's use, there was very much still one in the classical
paradigm of artificial intelligence.
Where we use expert knowledge,
where we use human understanding of the logic of the game and
experience in order to code up explicit rules, how the computer should play chess.
That modern computers, and
specifically those that first won convincingly against humans at Go,
specifically AlphaGo, they actually work much more like modern supervised learning.
In that they are trained on existing plays by computers, but
also by humans, in order to learn how good humans play,
in order to learn and mimic them, in order to learn how to play against them.
But now the even more modern programs that win convincingly both against humans and
against, for example, AlphaGo, for example, AlphaZero,
they work on an even more advanced paradigm where they don't even
require any more to learn against humans.
They're able to complete the only play against themselves and by doing so,
finding good plays that are dominant both against human play and
against computer play.
Goal of Webinar
So, with these motivating facts about the tremendous success of machine learning,
I now want to go back to the goal of this webinar.
So specifically, we are not going to teach you state of the art machine learning here
or how to fit your neural net.
This webinar is much more about trying to connect this world of machine
learning to the world of applied econometrics and
behavioral science where we want to use machine learning as a tool.
Specifically we think there are plenty of resources out there to learn machine
learning, as well as the statistics behind it.
Not just the kind of deep learning that are just hinted at, but
also the more statistical learning that is sometimes more applicable to the kind of
data sets that we have in behavioral and social sciences.
And so rather than showing you how to use those machine learning tools,
technically we want to show you how to use them conceptually and
how you can apply them concretely in program evaluation.
And so specifically my goal for
the next two of those modules will be to present you with a framework for using and
critically evaluating machine learning and applied econometrics.
On which we will then build in order to bring it together with typical tasks in
causal inference and program evaluation.
And so specifically we want to end on giving you some concrete tools with which
machine learning can actually enhance applied work.
So throughout, I should clarify,
I will focus on supervised learning on social-science type data.
So, I will neither deal a lot with unsupervised learning, or for
example topic modeling, nor will I dive deep into solving machine learning
problems when we indeed have very large pixel maps that we want to learn from or
we want to solve image classification problems.
I will be much more concerned with typical social science type data sets where for
example, we may want to predict house prices from the characteristics of houses.
Only what they want to learn who we should target when we think
of eradicating poverty.
I will also only touch on some of the technical challenges and implementation.
A lot of work has gone into making all these things computationally feasible.
And making code available that efficiently run so
that you can run many of those methods on your computer.
I will take most of this as given, and I will focus on using those
tools rather than kind of coding up these tools ourselves.
But I will try to give you enough understanding of how they work so
that you conceptually know what to look for, and where you should be careful, and
where you can hope that those tools can help you improve your work.
Finally I should flag that this is very much work in progress on
an evolving agenda.
So many of the things that we're going to talk about very close to current research,
and they may as well change over the next few years.
So with that, this is the structure of my part on machine learning basics.
Structure of Part on Machine Learning Basics
Today, in this module, I went over an introduction,
where I argued that a lot of what is driving modern machine intelligence has
the structure of a prediction exercise where it takes some training data.
That training data has some outcome y's some right hand side variable x,
which looks very much like statistics,
and now learn a function from that in order to apply it to new instances.
Tomorrow, in our next module,
we want to understand what the secret sauce of machine learning is.
We want to understand what makes this kind of prediction be so
successful when it seems a very,
very hard task if you were to use our standard linear regression tools,
which hardly would fit to something like a complex pixel map.
And in my third and last module of this first big chapter of our webinar,
I want to then end on characterizing the differences between the techniques
that come from machine learning, and those that we typically use in econometrics,
by pointing out that the two of them fulfill different goals.
And I will want to use that in order to provide a bit of a framework of where
we can use machine learning most profitably, and
where we have to be particularly careful in using it.
See you then.