Introduction
Hi and welcome back to the third part of this webinar,
where I give an introduction to machine learning from an applied perspective.
Specifically targeted at researchers and practitioners of applied econometrics,
who think about how to add machine learning to the econometric toolbox.
And want to understand how novel tools based on machine learning can
improve practical empirical analysis.
Motivation
In the first part of this webinar,
I motivated why looking at machine learning is particularly interesting,
specifically that machine learning is very powerful at solving prediction problems.
And that solving such prediction problems underlies many modern
machine intelligence services.
In the second part of this webinar, I introduced some of
the central ideas of what makes machine learning predict so well.
In this last part, I want to ask, given what machine learning does,
what can we learn from its output?
Recap
To recap the basics of machine learning from the last module, I argued
that machine learning is characterized by a combination of three features.
It uses very flexible functional forms, but
it limits the expressiveness in order to avoid excessive overfitting,
and it uses the data to resolve the trade off.
Specifically, it uses the data to learn how much to regularize and
how much overfit.
How much expressiveness to allow.
In this part of the webinar, I want to ask, what do these specific features?
So what is the fact that we fit machine learning in this specific way,
imply for the properties of the resulting prediction function?
And how can we therefore use those prediction functions in applied work?
To remind ourselves, here is the basic setup that we studied machine learning in.
We considered specifically supervised learning or
prediction where we are given a data set,
which is the training data set of some outcome variables y and
then some covariance x, as well as the loss function.
And our goal is to find a prediction function so
that we predict y well from x with respect to that loss function.
Specifically, we wanted to produce an outcome with a low expected loss,
where the expectation here is over a new sample point drawn
from the same distribution as our training sample.
So now assume we have solved that problem.
We have found a prediction function that works really well.
Maybe that's a regularized linear regression like a lasso or ridge.
Or maybe that's a random forest or a boosted tree.
What can we now learn from this function f hat about the truth?
So specifically assume we have this prediction function that
fits the relationship of y to x.
Well, what can we learn about the world from the prediction function f hat?
So often we may be interested in using a function that we have
fitted to the relationship of y to x to make inference on
the conditional expectation of y given x.
So to make inference on basically the optimal true relationship between
the outcome y and the covariance x in this regression sense.
So that may be particularly tempting to do when the output has a very common form.
For example, when the output as is the case in regularized linear regression like
lasso or ridge, actually itself has the form of linear regression.
So the question is, to which degree can we
now use the coefficient of that regularized linear regression?
In case some can say something about the world, for example,
which of the features in the world, which are the covariance actually matter for
determining the outcome.
Or maybe even saying something about the causal relationship
between the x variables and the y variable.
So in typical econometrics, what we want to know about those coefficients,
the kind of properties they may, for example, include the following.
We may want to know whether the coefficient has bias, so
whether on average that gets us to the truth.
We may want to know whether the coefficient is consistent.
Meaning in large samples it approximates the true coefficient well.
We may want to also be able to do inference.
Meaning, we may want to establish properties like asymptotic normality,
or being able to calculate standard errors or be able to perform tests.
In order to say something about the true parameter beta from what we
learn from this data.
And finally, we may want to understand how robust our estimate is.
For example, whether our takeaways depend on very specific features of the data, or
whether they generalize well, even if certain assumptions aren't exactly true.
Lasso
To study whether we can hope to use output from machine learning to learn something
about the world in a similar way to what we're used to with linear regression,
I want to start with the LASSO.
Because it produces output, it looks very similar.
To remind ourselves, what does a LASSO do?
The LASSO fits a linear regression with the additional constraint
that the coefficients aren't allowed to be too large.
That allows us to still fit the LASSO even when
there are a lot of x variables in our regression.
And it allows us to fit the LASSO in a way that balances the expressiveness,
meaning the complexity of our function against the risk of overfitting.
And so the higher, the parameter Lambda is,
the higher the cost of complexity is, the smaller the coefficients were be and
potentially, the more of them will be zero.
So specifically we saw that the LASSO does not only shrink coefficients,
it also selects.
Meaning many of the coefficients may be zero.
And if there are multiple coefficients that produce a similar prediction outcome,
then the LASSO may be capitalist and that it just chooses a winner and
gives all to that one winner.
So, what does that step from or less to LASSO look in an example?
For that one, I'm using an example where our goal is to predict default.
So say this is default probability.
And we want to predict default from a number of information in our data set that
would be in a typical credit file that may include a person's income, their age.
Maybe information about the education, maybe their credit score,
and some other variables, here I assume there are a total of 80 of them.
So what does LASSO do relative to OLS?
While the problem with OLS is that there may be excessive overfitting and
that using all those variables, many of which may even be close to colinear.
And may lead to very unstable and
high variance coefficients that lead to bad prediction performance.
The LASSO instead says, let's only use a subset of those by putting a penalty.
On coefficients that are particularly high or in the case of the LASSO,
implicitly also by coefficients with a lot of nonzero coefficients.
So when the LASSO selects those, there is a hope here that the resulting
sparse solutions can actually tell us a lot about the variables that matter.
Maybe for example, the LASSO could be good at telling us which variables cause
default to be higher or lower.
So to study to which degree we would be able to do so,
here's an exercise that we ran in a paper on credit scoring specifically
the fairness of credit scoring and attempts to regulate it.
So in that case, what we did is we didn't only run the LASSO once,
but we ran the LASSO multiple times on different subsets of the same dataset.
So we chose ten random subsets of the same dataset.
So the distribution of all those ten subsets is the same.
And then we ran the LASSO on each of them even holding the penalization
parameter lambda constant.
And every time we checked,
what are the variables that are selected by the LASSO in each of the runs?
Here's the result that we got.
Results
On the x axis, you see the 10 different iterations.
On the y axis, you see the coefficients that were actually selected.
What you can see here is that there are clearly some patterns,
there are some coefficients that are persistently selected.
And there are some coefficients that are persistently not selected.
So black meaning is selected, meaning the coefficient is not 0.
So if there is a black line all the way from the left to the right, it means that
this coefficient was included in all of the models across all the ten runs.
If on the other hand there is a white line, meaning the coefficient is never
selected, then that means it was always set to 0 in all of those ten iterations.
But the shocking thing that I think this exercise shows is that while
there may be some persistent patterns, for many of the coefficients.
There is no clear pattern visible in the sense that many of
the coefficients are sometimes selected and sometimes not selected.
So now before we think about the implications,
let's think about what could be going on here.
So what happens here?
What happens
So sometimes the LASSO will select some of the coefficients and
other times it will select some other of the coefficients.
That is perplexing at first because we may think that a good prediction function
should always look similar,
given that the data in each of those folds was basically the same.
However, in high dimensional data, and in many typical datasets that
we may work with that have a very high number of covariates.
It can be the case that these covariates are very highly correlated.
And that for example, age in this regression can very well be expressed or
predicted by a combination of other variables.
Now if one of those variables can very well be predicted by a combination of
the others, then whether age is included or
not doesn't really change much the LASSO's ability to predict.
Because it could simply choose some of those variables that are highly correlated
with age into those instead and still get the same predictive power.
And indeed, it turns out that the Brechtian quality and
even the predictions themselves do not vary too much across those ten draws.
So what do we take away from that?
So if he had really hoped that the LASSO tells us something about which
variables matter,
then at least in this example in the high dimensional case it's probably not a good
idea to put a lot of weight on which variables were selected by the LASSO.
Simply because of the fact that which variables get selected changed so
much from draw to draw.
But beyond this very general statement, we can get a little bit more precise and
study in a little bit more detail what kind of biases can actually happen,
when we think about which variables get selected by the LASSO and
what their coefficients are.
So if you want to just get the general intuition,
Biases
I think the example I just went through may already be enough.
But now I want to be a little bit more precise.
Look at one very specific example and talk about the biases that can happen here.
Specifically, I'm assuming that there is just three variables x1,
x2 and x3, some outcome variable y, and
that the outcome variable only depends on x2 and x3 in a specific way.
So what could happen when I fit the LASSO here,
which doesn't like to include a lot of the covariance.
First of all, there could be selection biases, where if x2 and
x3 are very highly correlated, then the LASSO may decide not to include x3,
because x3 by itself will not be very predictive if x2 is already included.
Because if x2 and x3 are very highly correlated then it may be easy to
express most of the effects of x3 by simply using x2.
And that would reduce the cost of complexity by not making prediction much
worse.
So I would call this compactification bias, meaning the set of variables that
are actually included are less than the variables that are in the true model.
And they are in this case, a subset.
So I'm only including x2, despite x3 also mattering in the true model.
But they can also be the opposite thing.
They can be expansion bias.
It can even be that a variable gets included in the LASSO.
That is not in the true model.
Why can that be?
Well, assume that x1 happens to be very correlated with y in
the sense that it is a good expression of what the combination of x2 and
x3 is that really matters for the outcome.
This may be a little bit artificial, but in very high dimension,
we can see all kinds of correlations.
So in this case,
x1 alone would be a better predictor than x2 alone or x3 alone.
But including both x3 and x2 may be very costly and therefore the LASSO may
prefer to just include the one variable that is correlated with both x2 and x3.
Explains both reasonably well, rather than including any of the true variables.
Beyond what is included, they can also be biases in size.
So assume x3 is not selected,
that doesn't mean that the variable x2 is correctly represented.
Specifically by excluding x3, the LASSO will also bias
the coefficient on x2 through omitted variable bias.
So we are aware that there can be biases in any our regression when we omit certain
variables.
What the LASSO does is by excluding variables,
it actively encourages or generates omitted, variable bias.
So in that case, the LASSO decides not to include a certain
variable because another highly coordinated variable included.
That automatically will create omitted variable bias in the variable that
is still included.
Even if x2 and x3 are selected,
there will still be some bias by shrinking the coefficients towards zero.
So even then there will be some shrinkage bias, but
that I think is typically second order to the omitted variable bias.
Which may be more misleading than simply shrinking towards zero.
So in high dimensions, I would say that such correlations can happen a lot.
And therefore, we always have to be aware that such biases can happen and
we should be very careful With interpreting.
Now, Ridge may be slightly better behaved because it doesn't include things, but
Ridge can also have biases.
So let's recall what Ridge does.
Ridge is socialist in nature.
It tends to smooth out the coefficients because it penalizes very high
coefficients by penalizing the sum of squares of those coefficients.
In that case, the dice as we can see, And
Bias
we can see in a simple example, just two variables x1 and x2.
Let's assume the outcome only depends on x2.
In that case, we can actually explicitly write what the coefficient on x1 and
x2 will be as a function of the correlation between x1 and x2.
As well as a function of the regularization parameter over here,
and for simplicity assuming that there's no noise whatsoever.
So what happens here, here I have two kinds of biases.
The first is an expansion bias, meaning that the Ridge regression
puts weight on x1 despite x1 actually not mattering for
y whenever x1 and x2 are correlated.
Because it tends to be socialist and smooth things out.
At the same time,
that can be shrinkage bias where the coefficient on x2 is therefore lower.
So in that case,
we could see a regression where it looks like x1 has quite some effect.
But that is really because of Ridge and regularization and
not because x1 has a true effect.
Furthermore, this behavior is not restricted to linear regression
type estimators.
For example, we could repeat something similar by looking at the trees that gets
selected when we fit a regression tree.
And just look at what are the variables that get selected in the top trees in
a small tree.
And what we will see there is something similar, and this is just for
illustration, I don't think it's like the cleanest example for anything really.
But just showing that, when I just look at the top variables chosen by the tree,
sure, again there are some ones that get selected quite
frequently like this one here on top.
But a lot of them get selected sometimes but not that often.
So the same thing, just looking at a tree is unlikely to tell us
something about the true underlying stable relationship,
just witnessed by the fact that it changes a lot from the algebra.
So what is my takeaway from all this?
Takeaway
My takeaway is that we should distinguish carefully not just between the methods we
use, but also between the questions that these methods try to answer.
Specifically I want to distinguish between two goals here.
One is the goal of prediction where we care about out-of-sample loss
minimization.
And the other is the goal of estimation where we care about inference on
coefficients and finding out which of the x's specifically affects y.
So in high dimensions, in a world we can have good predictions even when
the coefficients are unstable, biased, inconsistent, estimation is hard.
But because in big data and many functions that look quite different kind of
similar prediction properties, it will be very hard to distinguish between those,
and therefore it will be very hard to perform good estimation.
So my big takeaway here is that the very features, meaning the complexity,
the regularization and the tuning that machine learning brings in,
that make predictions are successful also make estimation hard.
Because they make it much harder to understand coefficients well,
they make it harder to interpret them well because of bias.
And they make it harder to interpret them well also because we do data driven
tuning, which actually makes inference considerably harder.
Therefore, my big takeaway here is that machine learning is amazing at y
hard problems.
Hard problems that are about finding good predictions, but
it's not by itself built to solve beta hard problems or
problems that are about doing inference on parameters.
Prediction
So, just to clarify what I mean by those terms,
when I say machine learning does prediction, and
kind of linear regression type estimation is having a different goal.
So what I mean by prediction is that, of course in one way,
machine learning is not great at prediction, it's not necessarily
great at prediction and what would happen if I use an alternative policy.
Which is inherently causal inference question.
So, I don't mean the kind of what would happen if prediction or
the what will happen tomorrow if something has changed.
What I mean by prediction is really not this kind of factual that requires
structural causal knowledge.
But it is the question,
can I get a good fit of y hat to y on data from the same distribution?
So it's really saying prediction holding the distribution constant.
On the other hand, when I look at estimation, and I say it's not great at
estimation, of course in one sense, machine learning is great at estimation.
It's great at approximating the optimum prediction function well with
minimal loss.
However, this loss is prediction loss.
It doesn't really tell us much about the difference in parameters.
It only tells us something about the difference in terms of whether this set of
parameters produces different predictions or not.
So when I say that machine learning is not great at estimation,
I really mean it's not great at something like estimation consistency.
Meaning the coefficient is close to the other coefficient in a norm that
is not implied by prediction.
So taking all this together, here are my take-aways for applied work.
Summary
Machine learning provides high quality predictions y hat.
While the prediction quality comes with guarantees from the hold-out, so
for example,
I'm able to say it predicts at least that much with some statistical uncertainty.
There's typically no guarantees about the quality of estimation, and
no estimation consistency.
Or at least estimation consistency,
meaning the coefficient converging to the true coefficient getting very close to
the true coefficient is much harder to establish than prediction consistency.
Hence, by itself when we look at machine learning output,
we should not interpret it structurally or
even causally in the sense of how are the x's related to the y's,
but we should take it as what it is, which is a great predictor.
As a side note, it is also very hard to do inference on this f hat, because in many
of the machine learning methods, they're very complex, they use data driven tuning.
So it's very hard to use tools like the bootstrap, and
the bootstrap may typically fail.
So simply saying, well, couldn't I just have bootstrap this and
seeing that the lasso was unstable it's not that easy.
Because the lasso doesn't typically fulfill the kind of
conditions under which we know that the bootstrap works.
So therefore, where can we use machine learning?
I'm a big fan of machine learning.
I think it provides very good prediction.
So in my eyes, the right answer to that is we should use it for prediction problems,
and ask where are interesting prediction problems.
And here are some cases.
Prediction Problems
First of all, we could use machine learning or
we can use machine learning as already done for data pre processing.
For example, using text data, using image data,
simplifying very complex data to the most important components.
All this can often be caused as a prediction component.
For example, I can predict weather I can predict crop yield or
economic outcomes from satellite image data, and
then use satellite images in place of the data to construct good proxies.
A second big area is tasks that are actually inherently prediction tasks.
Meaning tasks where prediction is an interesting question of interest.
And these have also been coined as prediction policy problems.
And one good example would actually be poverty targeting.
In the case of poverty targeting, I'm interested in understanding which
household likely has low consumption, so that I know which household to help.
And in that case,
we could cast this as a production problem where it's really not about understanding.
Of course, it was interesting understanding what leads to
a household having low consumption, but
in the end for the poverty targeting question of just where should I send help,
it may be most important to simply have a good prediction.
And I think there are a whole host of questions in that area,
host of problems in that area that are pure prediction problems.
Third, there are many questions where we care
about parameters in some part of the problem,
but there may be some implicit prediction problems in the background.
Something like using high dimensional variables as control variables,
using them for propensity scores, using high dimensional instruments.
And in the next part of our webinar series, my colleague Susan Athi,
will specifically talk about ways in which we can combine those two.
In which we can enhance causal inference by using tools and
techniques and ideas for machine learning in order to enhance them,
which will often require to carefully adapt machine learning to
the specific task at hand, rather than just using it out of the box.
So with that, let me wrap up for the webinar that I presented.
Conclusion
Here's what I did, I first motivated this webinar by saying
machine learning is amazing at prediction.
And also prediction solutions actually provide a lot of value in modern
machine intelligence tasks.
Second, I asked the question how we can get good predictions and
what machine learning does to get there.
In other words, I asked the question, how can we get good y heads?
And in this last part, I compared getting good y heads to getting good beta heads,
or in other words, getting good estimation.
And I derived as a takeaway,
that machine learning is great at getting high quality y hats,
but by itself doesn't deliver good beta hats or good estimation.
And with that, I want to thank you for following the webinar.
Thank you
I would very much appreciate your feedback if there were particular parts that you
liked that you found helpful, or especially if there
were some parts that you didn't like as much or had a hard time following.
Please shoot me an email and let me know, so
that we can improve those webinars in the future.
Thank you.
