
Intro
On the path towards developing confounding-robust methods for estimating heterogeneous treatment effects, the first thing we need to do is
review how to estimate concentrated effects in a confounding-robust way.
To see why this matters, it's helpful to think in terms of a concrete algorithm. Suppose you wanted to develop tree based methods for
treatment effect estimation that's confounding-robust. Well, then remember how do trees work?
Trees are first can cut your feature space, your x space into leaves and
then in each leaf, you can estimate a constant treatment effect.
The immediate implication of this is that if you want a confounding-robust for treating effect estimation, you're going to have to have access to
a confounding-robust method for estimating concentrating the facts. And then that's the thing you're going to want to deploy in each leaf.
Constant treatment effects
So, this is going to be the focus of this part of the lecture.
In order to kind of get some grounding and be able to thought about formal results,
I'm going to make a pretty drastic assumption here. That is, I'm literally going to assume constant treatment effect, that is for
every unit, data is treated and controlled potential outcome and these potential outcomes are separated by the same amount for every person.
For every person, there's a reward you would have gotten with treatment minus the reward you would have gotten without treatment and
that difference is tau, constant for every unit. And what we want to do is we want to estimate the staff.
Next urbanists is a very strict setting.
But the methods we're going to develop motivated by this question are going to be applicable in addition at all so.
I should also note just in terms of notions we've encountered in the lecture. So far, we've seen the conditional average, we've spent a lot of time talking
about the conditional average treatment effect function, tau of x. And of course, if treatment effects are constant, then this means that
the conditional average treatment effect function tau of x is just constant tau for each value of x.
And actually kind of estimating purposes. This is what we're actually going to use to motivate our approach,
not the stronger assumption here. I'm going to say more about this later.
We've talked a lot about average treatment effect estimation. Estimating constant treatment effects is a different problem.
It's an easier problem. Essentially, when you're estimating an average treatment effect,
you let this function tau x vary arbitrarily and you want to kind of estimate an average over it whereas here kind of I give you
an extra piece of information that is the treatment effect is actually constant and
you can target that and that's going to kind of lead to a different estimation.
I'm going to say more about that in just a few minutes.
All right, when we have this constant treatment effect model also can assume uncompoundedness, like throughout.
And what this is going to imply is unconfoundedness plus the constant treatment effect model is going to mean that the expected value of y
conditional on both x and w is going to be decomposed as follows. It's past the baseline effect, this is the expected control potential output given x.
It may vary with x. And then if you've treated, your treatment effect gets bumped up by tau.
That's the constant treatment effect part.
And this kind of tau is a thing we want to estimate. One thing that's nice about this formulation of treatment effects
in terms of this kind of partial linear model, is that it's kind of you can see exactly what's going on.
You can also use it to get a nice reminder of wise estimating tau not so easy.
You could, in the setting, think you could estimate tau by just taking the average of the treated units minus the average of the control units because of course,
all the treated units had their outcomes bumped up by tau. But if you do so, what you're going to get, sure you're going to get this tau,
but then you're also going to get this second bias term here.
Which is essentially the expected baseline effect among people who were selected into treatment versus the expected baseline effects for
people who are selected into control. And if you're not in randomized trial,
this orange thing may not be zero in general. And so, kind of being robust to that is why estimating tau
is a non trivial problem. So, what are we going to do?
Robinson's transformation
This problem here that kind of is induced by the concentration effect model is often called a partial linear model.
Why is it partial linear? Well, this term WT looks like what you'd have in linear regression, kind of,
as in linear regression, you have a treatment indicator, the treatment indicator gets a coefficient tau and you want to estimate it.
So this part is linear, but then you have also the baseline effect, how you depend on x and that's not if we replace this and
kind of instead of mu 0 x, we just had something like x beta here.
So we kind of assume that the baseline effects were linear in x, then we have a linear model.
With the partial linear model does it, it kind of lets the way kind of the exit into the problem, the nonparametric but
still preserves the linear structure on the treatment.
So this is the problem you want to solve. It's also often called a semiparametric problem.
Just because this part is parametric, there's a single treatment parameter you want to estimate.
But there's a nonparametric, what's called a nuisance term. It's a nuisance term because it's something we need to estimate but
we're not necessarily interested in it. So we have a non-parametric nuisance term rather than a parametric work.
So, how are we going to estimate tau?
Anything that parametric problem essentially because it has this kind of nonparametric component requires a little care in approaching estimation.
But here, it turns out there's a very nice solution that kind of starts
from what's called Robinson's transformation introduced in this paper.
And the idea is first, let's define these auxilary quantities.
The first thing we have here is e of x, our old friend the propensity score.
Like I mentioned earlier, it was a concern that the propensity score didn't feature heavily and your STX learners because you did the propensity score,
plays a key role in helping you be confounding-robust. So here propensity score makes a return.
We're also going to define these this other quantity, which is a little less commonly used, but still easy to interpret.
This is the expectation of y given x, ignoring treatment. So this is kind of my best guess of what your outcome would be if I only know your
value of x, but I don't know yet were you treated or not. In the partial in your vault model, m of x is mu 0 of x plus tau times probability.
And given this notation, what you can do
is you can just essentially subtract m of
x from both sides of this expression here.
And then what you see is that y minus mx is equal to tau times the treatment lands e of x plus epsilon.
Epsilon here is really just kind of the difference between y and
its expectation given X and W. The point is that, the expectation of epsilon given X and W is zero.
In rewriting the problem in this way, we've essentially done nothing. But we still get some very helpful insights out of here.
Suppose you actually knew them, and you knew it, then, how would you estimate how?
Well, it's very easy. Just run a univariate linear regression. Your response variable is this difference Y minus M.
Your single regressor is this variable W minus E. And then tau is just kind of the regression coefficient you get
by regressing Y minus M, and W minus C. If you knew M and E, then this approach would give you very
simply consistent asymptotically normal method for estimating tau with kind of of standard inferential guarantees also.
Of course the difficulty is that, unless you're in a net randomized trial, you probably don't know the propensity score E.
And you certainly don't know this baseline effect M. So all this kind of pick the position of Y given X.
Best guess of why ignoring treatment function M. So, you can't apply that strategy.
But they still suggest a practical algorithm, right? If we know what we would do, if we knew E and M, but
we just don't know them, then you can hope that.
We've got access to a number of [LAUGH] machine learning black boxes to solve prediction problems here, this predicting W and Y from X.
These are just basic prediction problems. So we can estimate e hat and m hat by throwing a predictive black box at the problem.
And then we can estimate tau by residual regression, If we had kind of plotted the true m e terms in here.
This would kind of by Robinson strength formation immediately give you a good estimate, for tau.
But out here we're going to have to estimate the end and ease that you might hope that this would still work at least reasonably well.
How good is it? It's not clear from writing down. What kind of which would be immediately clear is that if M and E are calm and
consistent. Then how I should also be consistent, but treating a concentration parameter.
Another thing I should note is this expression I wrote here. This is just he closed form solution for
the kind of univariate linear regression problem here. So, this is kind of this thing in purple here means nothing else and
The Partially Linear Model
just run the univariate regression of Y minus M hat on.
All right, so this is obviously consistent, is a good, I woun't be telling you about this if it weren't good.
We get a very nice result on asymptotic properties of tau hat.
And this should be kind of reminiscent of the results we saw further
average treatment effects estimator using AIPW we saw in week two.
And the guarantee is as follows, the end result is what we want, and is a central limit theorem for the constant treatment effect,
with errors that decay is one over random n. That means when we take the errors and we blow them up by random,
then we get a kind of limiting normal random variable. So that's exactly what we want.
What are the conditions? The conditions are again that this the these m hat,
and he had estimators. Well, they don't need to be perfect, but they need to be reasonably accurate.
But they don't need to be kind of one over random N scale. So kind of emphasized in week two, whenever you're using machine learning
methods for causal inference It's okay to assume that they're pretty accurate.
But you should never assume that they're perfect. And this guarantee here is exactly the kind of thing we'd like,
which is steps one and two when we kind of through machine learning black boxes to add the problem of estimating hat.
We need them to succeed and being reasonably accurate, but not necessarily perfect.
And again, just I normally emphasize this a lot, but to kind of emphasize the counter intuitiveness of the result.
You might think that there's this kind of garbage in garbage out principle, where if you have to estimate e hat and m hat terms.
Well, if there's kind of some error scale on these m hat and e hat, then there's no way tau hat could be more accurate, than kind of these
estimated things for e hat and m hat you're putting into the expression. But this theorem tells you that the garbage in garbage
out principle doesn't hold here. You're allowed to have kind of estimates here,
whose typical errors on the order of 104 through 10. That's a pretty big error scale.
And yet, just like with AIPW estimator, the errors are going to cancel out in just the right way.
So actually even though these might have four through 10 scale errors one of the four through 10 scale errors.
This will be accurate on the one over root N scale. So it'll be an order of magnitude more accurate.
In terms of details, the conditions are essentially the same as what we had for
A Pw, which is here I said, you needed some modest regularity conditions.
Whereas those regularity conditions, will turns out just kind of as long as you use Cross Fitting,
you can essentially ignore any regularity conditions that go in there. So the setups essentially its going to need to be,
you've run this estimator, get them AP hat. Use cross fitting like in week two, and then as long as M and E had a reasonably
accurate, you're going to get the central limit theorem you want for that.
And I'm not going to talk about it now, but kind of of you can get confidence intervals for.
Out of this residual regression, the way you usually get confidence intervals, out of a regression of this type.
The pyramid sentry tells you that, as long as you use cross-fitting, you can ignore the sampling error of m hat, and e hat.
Building confidence intervals with the conditions that would be on hold. And that gives you a kind of very simple way of constructing [INAUDIBLE].
So last thing kind of, this is kind of an aside,
but just to kind of connect some dots. If you think this kind of way of estimating a concentrated
effect is a little bit strange or unusual, I just kind of tried to convince you that it's not.
I just wanted to connect it to an estimator that hopefully is familiar. And that is the linear regression kind of standard linear regression estimator,
the treatment effect. Were kind of what you do if you just run linear
regression, why I kind of tilde x I plus w y.
So this is kind of in our notation, you just predict y as a linear function of x and w.
And grab the coefficient W as your treatment effect estimate. And if you've taken a kind of linear algebra base class on linear regression,
you'll probably know that there's this only equivalent characterization of linear regression.
Which is to estimate the coefficient of W on Y in a model where you control for X.
Well, you can kind of construct that coefficient as follows. First, fit a linear model of W on X.
Then fit a linear model of Y on X. And then the coefficient for W in the full regression, where you predict Y from X and
W is going to involve running a residual-on-residual regression.
Where you kind of regress regression residuals of Y versus your best
prediction of Y from X versus those on W versus your best prediction of W from X.
And so what this actually shows is that app is algorithmically. Linear regression is just a special case of
this kind of estimator based on Robinson's transformation. Where we've, instead of using machine learning methods for e hat and
m hat, we just use linear regression to predict Y from X and W from X.
So there's a lot to say about this connection and kind of many lenses under which you could investigate it.
But at the very least, I hope this connection suggests that this estimator based on Robinson's transformation is a very natural way.
Kind of move beyond linear regression, at least in a setting where you want to kind of preserve the constant treatment effect assumption.
So you still have something that's like a constant treatment effect parameter that you could hope to target using something that's a generalization of linear
regression. So this is how one can estimate constant treatment
effects in a way that's compounding robust under
the kind of no unmeasured confounders assumption.
In my experience, it's a very good estimator. It's one I recommend using.
And just kind of the bigger picture is that now we've seen two different confounding robust estimators.
This means the AIPW estimator we saw in week 2, and the residual-on-residual regression estimator
based on Robinson's transformation for the constant treatment effect.
And both of these estimators have very similar properties. Where we're working under the unconfoundedness or
no unmeasured confounders assumption. Then we ended up in this kind of semiparametric type specification,
where we have kind of a low dimensional object of interest, either the average treatment effect or the constant treatment effect parameter.
And we also have nonparametric nuisance components, the baseline effect, the propensity score.
And then what these shared property of these estimators is that they kind of
start with machine learning based estimates of the nuisance components.
And as long as they're reasonably accurate, then you get a 1/root n-rate central limit theorem for the thing we actually care about, our target.
So that's all I'm going to say here other than kind of recommending the use of both estimators.
For those of you who want to dig deeper, I should emphasize this,
both are case of a much more general recipe. If you want to read more about it, this paper here by Chernozhukov and
co-authors has kind of much more to say about how and why these kinds of estimators or these kinds of properties arise.
What's the difference?
All right, the last thing I wanted to say about estimating constant treatment effects, and this is a little more of an aside.
But some of you may be confused. We talked about estimating average treatment effects.
We talked about estimating constant treatment effects. What's up with that? They seem like very similar estimate, very similar problems.
Why is there a difference? And to see why there's a difference,
Consider a problem where kind of you have a fairly large X space.
And then you have some regions of X space where it's very easy to estimate treatment effects.
Say, kind of your good balance across treatment and control units. You have many units of both types.
And then you have another region of X space where it's very hard to estimate our treatments effects.
Maybe kind of almost everyone were assigned a control, and so we barely have overlap.
Well, in that kind of setting, estimating a constant treatment effect versus an average treatment effect are going to end up being very different problems.
If you want to estimate an average treatment effect, what do you essentially have to do? You need to estimate the treatment effect here where it was easy.
You need to estimate the treatment effect here where it was difficult. And then you kind of take the average of the two treatment effects.
And if over here, your treatment effects estimates were inaccurate, there's kind of nothing you can do about it. Your treatment effects are going to be inaccurate everywhere.
On the other hand, if I tell you a priori that treatment effects are constant everywhere, well, you can just kind of ignore this part of feature space where
the problem was too hard. And just kind of estimate your constant treatment effect over here,
where you actually had good signal, and then just extrapolate that everywhere. And that makes the problem a lot nicer.
To kind of see this play out in an example, here's a simple simulation.
Constant vs average treatment effects
The salient part here is that, first, the treatment effect is constant. It's everywhere 0.3.
So if you know that the treatment effect is constant, you can just kind of run methods for constant treatment effects.
But maybe if you don't know if the treatment effect is constant everywhere, and you wanted to estimate the average treatment effect,
then you do something else. And why is kind of this problem harder when kind of you don't know that
the treatment effect is constant and you have to kind of estimate treatment effects everywhere and aggregate them?
You can see this by essentially cutting the problem into three zones based on the propensity score.
So here, the propensity score is here depends on X3. There are some units, one group of units where the propensity score is very small.
Most of these people receive control. There's some region of feature space where most people get treated,
the propensity scores are close to one. And here's this in between zone, where propensity scores are far from both zero and one.
This is kind of a region with good overlap. This is the kind of type of data we like for estimating treatment effects.
So if you wanted to estimate an average treatment effect, what would happen? You kind of qualitatively have to separately estimate treatment effects in
these three zones. Here, estimating the treatment effect is very hard. Almost everyone gets control.
You have hardly any treated units. So you just have very little information about what the treatment effect
actually is. This middle zone, you have good overlap, so estimating a treatment effect is easy.
And again, here, it's going to be hard again because most people receive treatment, so there are very few controls.
And then what the average treatment effect approach is going to have to
do is then kind of Aggregate to mostly kind of treatment effects estimate,
there is for these two regions were estimated treatment effects was hard.
And so probably those treatment effect estimates are going to be pretty inaccurate with kind of the more accurate one from this easy zone.
But then kind of any inaccuracies you built up in the in the difficult zones are going to add up.
On the other hand, if you estimate your cost and treatment effect, you just kind of don't care about these two zones, you effectively throw this data away.
You just kind of only zoom in on the part of the dataset where you've had good overlap and where you can estimate treatment effects accurately.
You learn what the treatment effect is there and you just don't. You don't worry about the rest of the problem.
This is of course, a qualitative story for what the methods do. But in practice, the intuition goes through for what actually happens also.
And, okay, what do the numbers look like? So here as always, that kind of just gave you a little bit of code,
you can copy paste. This implements the constant treatment effect estimator by residual
regression with heteroscedasticity robust errors. And if you do this, you get,
remember the true constant treatment effect here was 0.3. But your 95% confidence interval is 0.3 plus or minus 0.15, this is very good.
What about if you didn't know a priori that the treatment effect was constant?
So you kind of had to use a method for average treatment effect estimation that aggregates data from everywhere,
including the difficult zones, and then try to synthesize. Well, the treatment effect you get out of this is going to be much less accurate,
you would got 0.56, plus or minus 0.35. The point estimate was less accurate than the confidence intervals were wider.
And this just kind of highlights the extent to which the problem average treatment effect estimation is harder.
Augmented problem concentration effect destination. For those of you kind of think you have problems in terms of the kind
of applications, you might be sensitive to the tension here, right?
Kind of in this problem, the treatment effects actually were constant. But kind of as an analyst, you had two strategies.
You could either assume that the treatment effects were constant. Kind of assert knowledge from theory, but without validating it from data.
And if you're willing to assert constant treatment effect, then you can kind of estimate the concentrated effect very accurately.
Or you could kind of take a more agnostic approach. Where you don't start by assuming the treatment effects
are constant to allow for heterogeneity. And then you want to estimate an average of this T(x) function in a way
that's more robust. And you might like doing this, because it doesn't require asserting that treatment effects are constant a priori.
But here you see that there's kind of a large cost in precision from doing so.
And it's kind of a tricky trade off. If you're interested in this trade off, then kind of one very important
thing to ask is, what happens if you think the treatment effect is constant?
So you kind of run our residual estimator for the concentrating effect, but actually, there's treatment heterogeneity.
So kind of it doesn't exist thing that should be called the treatment effect parameter.
So if you just run this estimator that was justified on specific constant treatment
effect in a setting where T(x) is not constant, what do you get?
And the thing you end up getting, it's actually very nice. If you assume a constant treatment effect, but there's actually heterogeneity.
Then, what the concentrating the big estimator is going to converge to is this thing I called here tau e which is a weighted version of the average
treatment effect. We're kind of different parts of feature space are weighted by e(x) times 1- e(x).
That is kind of regions of feature space with more propensity scores that
our further kind of nicely between 0 and 1 are given more weight.
And with regions where propensity scores get very close to 0 and 1 are given less weight.
And actually, you can check that among all weighted average treatment effects this
tau e is the weighted average treatment effect that you can estimate the best
precision under kind of a homoscedastic model with this propensity score.
So anyways, if you're interested in this stuff, this is kind of a [LAUGH] rabbit hole one can go very far into.
But the point is that there, in the literature you can think of two ways to justify Robinson's method.
It can either be method that kind of takes this treatment effect, the treatment effect is constant assumption very literally.
And then just tries to estimate that tau in an efficient way. Or you could relax,
you could say you essentially think that the treatment effects are almost constant. And given these assumptions, you're going to run this method, you recognize
that there's some heterogeneity in the treatment effect than the thing you're going to get is actually a weighted average of the treatment effect.
But the treatment effects are close enough to being constant and maybe this weighted treatment effect is close enough to what you care about.
And you can just relax, and use that estimator in your analysis.
