
Intro
The first thing I want to do a deep dive on today is on failure modes for
estimators of heterogeneous treatment effects. The motivation for this is that often in an engineering setting,
someone will propose an advocate for a machine that does something, they'll tell you that it works.
But then you can look at some performance diagnostics and is the machine working or not?
It's kind of hard to tell. Generally, what's considered a best practice is that if a machine
does the job well, it solves some problems you might have had. So first, you demonstrate the problem, you could argue the problem is difficult to
solve, then you show that the machine solves the problem. And I, at least, get some confidence that the machine is doing something useful.
So this kind of the approach I'm going to take with methods for treatment heterogeneity in observational studies.
I'm first going to show you some things that can go wrong. Two things in particular, I'm going to worry about our regularization bias and
confounding bias. And then I'm going to discuss how you can design methods that avoid these problems.
And so throughout this part of the lecture, I'm going to go by kind of example.
I'm going to show kind of a series of baselines, methods for a treatment heterogeneity, talk about when they work, when they don't work,
and kind of by seeing these methods either work or not work. You can kind of get an understanding of what regularization and
confounding bias are in practice.
Baseline Methods
But in terms of baseline methods, the simplest thing you can do is based on the following, a direct observation.
I remember we're working under unconfounding bias, the treatment is as good as random conditional index.
Then kind of following the same kinds of calculations we saw in lecture two. You can see that conditional average treatment effect,
that is the following thing, can be written as a difference.
Mu 1 of x minus mu 0 of x, where mu 1 of x is the expectation of Y, given X.
And treatment i set to 1, and mu 0 of x is the expectation of Y given extra controls.
So, the point here is that these two problems here, mu 1 of x,
mu 0 of x, these are just nonparametric regression problems.
So we could kind of attempt to learn how to predict Y from X and W directly.
And then try to learn mu 1 of x and mu 0 of x, take their difference, call that an estimate out of X.
And this will obviously be consistent given an update.
So to be a little more specific, you could try doing this in two ways.
Two Methods
The first is an hiraman nomenclature from this recent paper by Clinton et al.
There's reference to it in the course outline. So, first thing you could do is what's called the T-learner,
is you could try to solve two different regression problems. First, you're going to estimate mu hat 0 by predicting Y from X on the controls.
And then you're going to learn mu 1 of x by predicting Y from X on the treated.
And then you take the difference of these two regression estimates. It's called the T-learner because you ran two regressions.
But beyond that, it's just a very direct application of kind of the identity here,
essentially tau of it is mu 1 of x minus mu 0 of x, that relationship is true.
Then the T-Learner just puts hats on everything at estimates mu hat 1 of x and
mu hat 0 of x like a nonparametric regression, and then sets tau hat to be their difference.
So that's one thing you could do. Another very similar thing you could do, but kind of algorithmically, it looks
different, is that instead of predicting Y from X on treated and control separately. You could just kind of glob your X's and W's into a single covariant called Z,
and learn to predict Y from X and W simultaneously. So now, you have just a single u hat function that you can
give it covariates and a treatment status and then predict from, and then make a prediction there.
And then you could kind of query the same mu hat function twice, once with treatment
or set to 1, or once with treatment set to 0 and get predictions [INAUDIBLE].
Is called S-learner because you're in a single progression [INAUDIBLE].
So far, I've been very open-ended about how you would actually implement this.
You need to choose some method right to predict Y from either X and X and W. There are different choices you could make.
Methods
Here, I want to show some examples here on random forests kind of just because
they are easy to run, you could barely kind of do this way any other approach.
So, okay, in order to kind of understand a little bit of what's going on here, I'm going to show just kind of a couple of
slides to remind you about how trees and forests work. I know you've already seen it so far,
but it's just to kind of in diagnosing what could be going right or wrong. It's just going to help you to remember what's going on specifically in
the algorithm. If you ran this with loss or boosting in the simulations,
you might see similar results as to what happened to show later on. But kind of understanding step by step how that happened might look a little
different. So anyways, what's a random forest?
Random Forest
A random forest is a method that kind of tried to predict Y from X.
So it's just kind of this black box predictive method and
exactly the type we want to be core. How does it operate?
Well, essentially, each tree on its own, it's going to kind of subdivide a space into rectangles.
And it's going to average, is going to predict at this point X by averaging outcomes for everyone who falls within this rectangle.
And a random forest is going to aggregate trees. So just very quickly, we've already seen this before,
our trees kind of are going to zoom in on which rectangle is split in that by kind of recursively partitioning the feature space.
This is a somewhat unstable procedure. So then kind of back in the day,
there was a lot of discussion of kind of if you're training decision trees.
If there are many different ways, you could have trained a decision tree that all look similar or perform similarly, which one should you choose?
There was this something people work hard on until kind of at some point people realize you're better off not choosing just kind of
if there are many reasonable looking trees. Just train all the trees, and kind of get a consensus prediction as their average.
And that's what kind of enforce paper by Breiman does.
And so really kind of pictorially, if you have a bunch of trees here one tree predicts by the averaging outcomes in this leaf and
another tree predicts by averaging the outcomes in this leaf, and so forth. The random forests that's going to predict by just averaging the predictions by,
I mean, by all the trees, so it's kind of a double average. So this is what's going on.
There are different ways to kind of increase the diversity of the forest. But this is enough to understand what is going on with with a T-learner and
T and S Learners
S-learner. So anyways, what is the T-learner doing specifically for
estimating new hat 0 of x. It's going to train trees that kind of try to find regions where kind of
do best prediction of y given x with a control constant. Can make separate predictions in each of these regions than if you do a forest
you kind of do this with a bunch of trees and average those predictions.
You're going to train different trees to predict y from x on the controls versus the treated.
And then tau hat is going to be this difference. The S-lerner is going to do something different.
It's going to try to build trees, where kind of at each point you choose, do you make a split on one of the axes?
That is kind of do you create heterogeneity or do you make a split on W?
Which is kind of means creating a treatment effect. So, From a treatment effect estimation point of view but
the S-learner reinforced, algorithmically might look a little strange but can in terms of black box prediction.
Now forest just most like it. So this is what's going on here.
How good are these methods of treating heterogeneity? Let's try it out.
And just before going there, I just kind of wanted to, in case you want to copy paste on the slides. Here's kind of a few lines of code that implement the T-learner and
the S-learner using regression forest function for random forest.
Simulation Exercise
All right, how well do these do? And here's kind of a very simple simulation exercise for
estimating treatment effects. So you see, I'm kind of running a simulation with 4000 samples
in 10 dimensions, the probability of being treated as 0.3. And salient point here is that first treatment is
everyone is treated with probability 30%. So there's a randomized trial.
There's no association between any kind of unit characteristics and their probability of being treated.
So this is kind of from Republican friends point of view makes the problem a lot easier.
The second is you have this conditional average treatment effect function that called tau here.
It's also very simple, it's actually just the logistic shape in x3.
If you knew that kind of the conditional average treatment effect the logistic shape you could recover it very easily by a parametric modelling.
But, okay, the point is that machine learning, you don't need to know the parametric model a priori, we can kind of discover it from data.
And then there's going to be this baseline effect. Max of x1, x2 and 0.
This is a little more complicated. So essentially, This is sitting, it's supposed to be super easy.
If you're doing the right thing the study is randomized. So there's no confounding. The treatment of the function is very simple.
So you have to kind of focusing on the right objective. You should just nail it. But there's this kind of more complicated interactive baseline effect,
that if you're not careful my kind of problems. And how does everyone do?
Actually pretty terrible, right? So here kind of I'm plotting, remember the condition average treatment effect was just a function of x3.
So I'm plotting kind of, On a test set for each data point on,
Here in red you see kind of a true relationship between x3 and the conditional average treatment effect here and
in black you see the estimates from the T-forest or the S-forest. And you see it's kind of disastrously bad.
The T-forest is just kind of very, very spread out. And the S-forest is not only spread out but it's kind of systematically biased and
under estimating the size of the treatment effects. So, This is somewhat concerning.
You might have hoped for better, right, because I just started by writing tau of x is mu1 of x minus mu0 of x.
Let's estimate mu1 of x, let's do so using forest, forest are okay. Let's estimate mu0 of x using a forest, again, forests are okay.
And you think you're doing something okay, and then you kind of get this very bad empirical performance.
So, What went wrong? And the problem is essentially things called earlier regularization biases.
So, do you understand this, I kind of, I like this picture from this paper by Kunzel and al, I mentioned earlier.
With theory imagining is estimating treatment effects in the following very simple study.
Here x is one dimensional, so you only have one covariant. Y is also one dimensional, it's a randomized trial.
And I'm plotting all the data so each control point is x and each treated point is a blue dot, red x for the control points.
And the only wrinkle here is that you have a lot more control points than trigger points, Okay?
What's the treatment effect here? By I it's kind of clear, right? There's this difference between the treated and
controls is kind of always wandering. So kind of by I the treatment effect has to be one here, but
what happens when we try to estimate that heterogeneous treatment effect?
Let's try doing so using the T-learner box here. So what I'm going to start by doing is, remember the T-learner approach, what it
does is first estimates mu and 0(x), and predicts y from x under controls.
And it estimates mu and 1(x), it predicts y from x of the treated, and then it takes the difference.
And so what's going to happen here? Well, let's say I run a tree.
So I'm going to kind of put on infer from a tree on the controls. And I'm going to see the signal changes here and that the signal changes here.
So I'm going to do a very good job kind of. Here's one leaf and my treatment effect here.
Here's another leaf and my treatment effect here. And here's the third leaf on my treatment effect here.
And you could say this tree is very good task was to fit y from x amount of controls.
That was an obvious region in the middle where there was a shift in the response function.
And you found it and you adapt to it. So kind of well done tree, very good.
So now, the next thing we need to do is estimate. You had 1 of x, that predict y from x under controls.
We're, again, going to use the tree but here we have less data, Do we see any jumps the data obviously?
I mean, no, there should be a jump here and here, you can see it. But honestly, kind of well tuned tree given just this data,
it probably doesn't see any patterns at all. So you tree does the reasonable thing.
You don't see any evidence that you should split, just off.
So, we estimate the expectation of Y given X as essentially a constant function.
And again, that's very good. So, we're in good shape.
We did a great job fitting. You had one of X, we did a great job fitting. You had zero of X, then, what are we going to do at the end?
Remember, what we want is we want to fit tau
hat x = mu hat 1(x)- mu hat 0 (x). And we've done a great job fitting both mu hat 1(x) and
mu hat 0(x) in this picture. But now we take their difference, and what do we get?
The difference tau (x), well here, it's big, it's big, it's big, it's big, it's big. It's a big treatment effect.
Now, this middle zone where suddenly we have a very small treatment effect, because we had zero kind of, got bigger and now again,
you can get a big treat and effect at the end. And wow, there's a lot of treatment, interesting, right?
These people here and these people here really benefit from the treatment,
but these people in between here, not so much. All right, so it looks like we've found treatment pretty much.
But this is obviously very bad, right? We agreed that there's no treatment heterogeneity in this picture.
The treatment effect is constant at one the whole time. And kind of the worst thing you can do in data analysis in general,
is to claim that you found something, you found heterogeneity, you found a sigma in a case where there's none.
So, that kind of in such a simple problem, you can be tricked into thinking there's heterogeneity when there's none, is really unexcusable.
What went wrong? Well, the problem is that essentially you were using machine learning,
and of course, machine learning regularizes has to kind of adapt to the shape of the function.
And you didn't adapt to the shape of the function in a way that kind of recognized the task at hand.
When you were fitting the function of the controls, when you finished this red line, you had a lot of data.
So you were able kind of very kind of accurately
see any changes in the data and respond to them.
So you kind of regularize very little bit function aggressively, that's good.
In fitting this blue curve, after the treated units, you had less data.
So what you do? You don't introduce as many splits because you don't have enough data to kind of put more splits, effectively regularizing more,
you're pushing your function more for the simpler thing. And that's again good. But, then what happens is you have a discrepancy between how much you
regularized the the function on the treated in the controls. You regularize your function on the treated a lot and
very little on the controls. And then just because you regularize kind of this part of the difference very little, and this part of the difference a lot,
then you kind of inconsistently regularized tau hat. And this kind of heterogeneity emerges somehow
in the difference, and that's no good. So okay, that's regularization bias.
What I'm emphasizing here, is just kind of tau(x), it's true that tau(x) is mu1(x) minus mu 0(x).
But that doesn't mean that kind of machine learning based approaches, that kind of directly are motivated kind of by this functional equivalence without
being careful about what they're doing. Estimation wise, would it be any [INAUDIBLE].
So that's regularization bias, what can we do about it?
Exlearner
And notice that regularization bias is something that kind of arises even in randomized trials. Last week, Susan talked about causal trees as kind of one
algorithmic way of avoiding this problem in the case of tree specifically.
Here just to kind of feel I want to talk about these topics but to kind of show you some some other ideas also on how to avoid this problem.
Talk about the X learner, which was introduced by this paper from which I'm taking the pictures.
So what they want to do is they're the T-Learner of X-Learner, they're very nice,
in that you can just write them down as kind of a generic recipe. You have a generic recipe for predicting Y from X, you can just apply it and
turn it into a treatment effect estimator. They liked that aspect of it but just kind of didn't like that.
Gives you a lot of regularization bias. So, the X-Learner is an idea that kind of does
the same thing, but in a slightly fancier way. We're going to start by fitting, we're going to start by fitting.
You have 0 like before predict, Y from X. Then, once we fit Y from X,
we on the treated units kind of predict you had 0(x).
So this is kind of crudely you could be thinking as trying to impute for each treated unit, what would have happened if you gave them control.
And then look at delta i1(x), that kind of the difference
between the actual outcome for the treated unit,
minus kind of your best guess of what you might have had,
had you received the controller outcome. And you can think of this as a noisy proxy for
the individual treatment effect, Y 1 minus Y0.
If this functional form looks familiar to you and reminds you of synthetic controls, that's a good thing to be thinking about.
It's a very different application setting, with very different considerations, but the kind of estimated structure
looks very similar to what was done in synthetic controls. So they do this once, so they do this, and then the way they're going to
estimate the conditional average treatment effect function is essentially by on the treated units regressing this differences.
Yi minus mu hat (0) (Xi), actual treated minus imputed control outcome.
They're going to kind of regress these delta i's against x0 parametrically.
That's again, a prediction problem, you predict delta i1 from Xi on the treated units, and
that gives you a first estimate tau hat(0)(x) of the treatment effect.
Then what they do, sorry, that gives you first estimate tau hat(1)(x) of the treatment effect.
And then what they're going to do is they're going to swap roles. So they're going to estimate mu hat(1) from the treated, on the controls,
look at actual outcomes, actual control outcomes. Look at mu hat 1(x) minus Yi on the controls as another kind of proxy for
the ITE, and then estimate tau hat(0) from there. And then they're going to pull these and turn tau hat,
estimate the final treatment effect as a weighted average of these two CATE functions to estimate the treatment the controls.
The thing to note here is this last step the use of the propensity score he had just heuristic.
But the thing to note is kind of like most people are in the control than he had of X.
Is going to be pretty close to 0. So then kind of you're essentially just going to use the data extraction
that you get by first learning to predict y from x on the controls, and then taking these difference on the ticket.
So, again, you want code using forests.
But how does this work? That is much much better. This function you might be disappointed that okay.
Shouldn't good predictions, have kind of the black dots lie on top of the red dots,
like you would kind of if you're perfectly fit a parametric model. You might hope for that but you never get that on machine learning, one thing that.
It really emphasized in the lecture on average treatment effects is that machine learning methods, you should hope that they're almost always pretty good, but
never perfect. And this kind of X forest kind of in predicting the condition average
treatment effect from x3, I think lives up to that goal.
The black dots have the same shape, [INAUDIBLE].
And certainly this is much, much better than the SMT forests. So why was this better?
I think it's helpful to kind of consider the same picture as before. So remember the X learner starts by kind of fitting the same kind of red and
blue curves that we had before. But then what it's going to do is it's going to estimate these delta items,
so kind of these imputed treatment effects. So the way you can think of this on the picture is kind of every blue dot.
You're going to draw a curve down to the red curve.
And you're going to think of these as your delta I want. These are you kind of imputed, individually noisy proxies for
the individual treatment effects for treating people. Similarly for controls, all we can look at the blue curve as an imputed with what
happened to me under treatment. So we're going to draw all these lines here, okay?
There's way more of them. And we're going to look at these, are going to serve a symmetrical.
They're going to be kind of put would have called delta zeros on the previous slide.
And then, right? The X learners can estimate the Kate by predicting delta 1 from x and
delta 0 from x. And how does this work? Well, it turns out that kind of here remember,
the red curve here was very good. We got the shape, new head 0 of x is very accurate.
So, then these blue lines are going to be kind of good proxies of the treatment effect.
So, if we're going to try to estimate tau x by regressing these blue lines on x, we're in good shape.
On the other hand, the blue curve estimate new highs look good. So these red lines are going to be much less good proxies for the treatment.
Like they're pretty short here, but they're much longer here. So, when we actually get this, then we're going to get tau as one of x.
That's the thing that kind of predicted the Delta I on the treated. It's going to be a very good estimate of treatment effect essentially constant.
We're going to also get this tap at 0x which is going to be quite bad. But then kind of remember that excellent kind of tries to pool that was
one of the x and zero of x in a way that it most units received control.
Then it's really just going to update out with one of x a lot. So then the kind of final prediction of the X learner is going to be some weighted
average of talent one and Howard 0. But it's essentially just going to give you this blue curve here, which again,
is what we wanted an accurate estimate of essentially a constant treatment effect.
So this is what's going on kind of the exploiter looks a lot like the tiller this learner.
And this is kind of a recipe where you just solve a bunch of prediction problems in a row.
But kind of by being more careful about the recipe design you got
better results and are more robust regularization wise. So, this thing you can use it.
It's cool that in my experience X learner in randomized trials works very well.
And it's kind of very easy to implement because it only requires prediction.
So that's kind of a good thing to know.
confounding bias
All right, so that was regularization bias. The next thing, I wanted to worry about this, [LAUGH] You shouldn't worry about is confounding bias.
That's what happens when you're outside of a randomized trial. Your treatment assignment probabilities variable x,
and this relationship may be problematic. And again to get started with the simulation, here we have a similar
setting except now the treatment isn't assigned uniformly at random.
Now kind of there's a logistic shape in terms of x 3 work on the bigger X3 as the more likely to be created.
On the other hand, the treatment effect is constant here. So if you kind of get rid of all the confounding genetic problem.
[INAUDIBLE] But now there's more confounding because you'll
notice not only that your probability of being treated vary with x.
But actually generate the bigger X3 is bigger Y is going to be on average.
So there's this correlation between your baseline effect and treatment probability.
So, if you don't address the confounding, well, you're going to end up in trouble.
So what happens? Well, the tea forest is outright terrible.
The export is also terrible. The exports here isn't quite as bad, but it's definitely not good, right?
Like the exports, it's thinks that they're bigger treatment effects here than here for example.
It seems to be finding some heterogeneity where there is not. And kind of overall alternate methods here even though we saw that
the treatment effect is constant at 1. There's no heterogeneity. All of these methods hallucinate heterogeneous treatment effects.
I should emphasize the word heterogeneous on the slide also. They all kind of hallucinate heterogeneous treatment effects here.
No other treatment that it cost. And why is this?
Well, the theme conceptually is very closely related to what we saw earlier.
The propensity score here isn't constant. The propensity score isn't constant, you should be worrying about how are you adjusting for that.
When estimating the average treatment effect using AIPW was a nice way of doing this.
We need to also be able to address the propensity scores and propensity scores aren't constant on Emissary.
So that's going to be the focus of the next part of this lecture, but so
recap
just to recap, this is first part, right?
There are many things to worry about when putting a treatment heterogeneity,
regularization bias. There's confounding bias. Regularization bias is always there but
even in randomized trials, but there are many ways to address it.
The kind of causal tree construction you saw last time,
as it is a kind of very direct way of doing that. The X learner is also a nice way of addressing regularization
bias using kind of this prediction recipe type approach.
But okay, in observational studies, there's also this other type of bias,
confounding bias, and dealing with that is a little trickier.
We're going to need to bring the propensity score to the table again. We're going to need to be very careful in kind of separating the treatment effect
component from the problem from the confounding component of the problem. And find ways to kind of eliminate the confounding component while kind
of appropriately fitting and expressing the treatment effect component.
